Holographic Radiance Cascades for 2D Global Illumination
Rouli Freeman
University of Oxford
United Kingdom
rouli.freeman@gmail.com

Path Traced — 52spp
98.6 ms, RMSE 0.0667

Adrian Margel
adrianmargel.ca

Holographic Radiance Cascades — 52spp
7.67 ms, RMSE 0.00630

PT–600spp

Path Traced — 600spp
1080 ms, RMSE 0.00962

Alexander Sannikov
Grinding Gear Games
New Zealand

PT–52spp
HRC
PT–600spp
PT–52spp
HRC
Fig. 1. A 1024 × 1024 pixel scene with multiple emissive objects, rendered using naive path tracing and Holographic Radiance Cascades (HRC). Our algorithm
improves the root mean squared error (RMSE) by 10x compared to naive path tracing with an equal number of samples, where we calculate spp for HRC as
the number of ray intervals calculated divided by the total number of pixels.
Efficiently calculating global illumination has always been one of the great
est challenges in computer graphics. Algorithms for approximating global
illumination have always struggled to run in realtime for fully dynamic
scenes, and have had to rely heavily on stochastic raytracing, spatialtemporal
denoising, or undersampled representations, resulting in much lower quality
of lighting compared to reference solutions. Even though the problem of
calculating global illumination in 2D is significantly simpler than that of 3D,
most contemporary approaches still struggle to accurately approximate 2D
global illumination under realtime constraints.
We present Holographic Radiance Cascades: a new single shot scene
agnostic radiance transfer algorithm for global illumination, which is capable
of achieving results visually indistinguishable from the 2D reference solution
at realtime framerates. Our method uses a multi level radiance probe system,
and computes rays via combining short ray intervals as a replacement for
conventional raytracing. It runs at constant cost for a given scene size, taking
1.85 ms for a 512 × 512 pixel image and 7.67 ms for 1024 × 1024 on an RTX
3080 Laptop.

1 Introduction
The field of computer graphics has primarily focused on 3D
Global Illumination (GI). Unfortunately, contemporary realtime
approaches for 3D GI are very far from the reference solution in the
general case of fully dynamic scenes without significant temporal
reuse. In fact, even though the problem of 2D GI — computing the
light traveling through points in a finite grid, such as in Fig. 1 — is
significantly simpler than that of 3D GI, it still has no acceptable
realtime single shot solution.
We introduce a new method for this called Holographic Radiance
Cascades, which can provide results nearly identical to reference in
realtime for arbitrary scenes contained within the grid boundaries.
It is a variant of the Radiance Cascades algorithm [Sannikov 2023],
so it does not use stochastic raytracing and therefore is noiseless
and does not need any temporal caching. Our algorithm improves

2 • Rouli Freeman, Alexander Sannikov, and Adrian Margel

over RC by removing redundancies in the radiance field encoding,
making it more efficient and capable of handling hard shadows. We
also provide a specialized acceleration structure that approximates
long rays by combining short ones. This provides performance
independent of scene complexity, which allows for our algorithm
to handle detailed volumetrics and shapes without slowdown.

∞

𝐿(𝒑, 𝜔)⃗ = ∫

𝑇𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒑 + 𝑡𝜔)𝐿
⃗ 𝑠 (𝒑 + 𝑡𝝎, −𝜔)𝑑𝑡
⃗

Following the Radiance Cascades framework [Sannikov 2023], we
define the radiance interval 𝐿𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒒) as the radiance contributed
by the line segment from 𝒒 to 𝒑 rather than an infinite ray:
𝑑

𝐿𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒒) ≔ ∫ 𝑇𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒑 + 𝑡𝜔)𝐿
⃗ 𝑠 (𝒑 + 𝑡𝜔,⃗ −𝜔)𝑑𝑡
⃗

2 Related Work

(3)

0

(4)

0

Jarosz et al. [2012] is one of the best papers on 2D Global Illumi
nation. It discusses how to formulate standard rendering concepts
in two dimensions, and adapts path tracing, photon mapping, and
irradiance caching to 2D. However, it does not concern itself with
calculating fluence at non surface points.
Radiance Cascades (RC) is a new method for global illumination
introduced by Sannikov [2023], which is currently used in the
game Path of Exile 2 [Grinding Gear Games 2024] for screenspace
illumination. Its approach is very well suited to 2D, as the simplest
formulation of its algorithm tracks the fluence across space, rather
than on surfaces. RC works somewhat similarly to irradiance probe
methods [Majercik et al. 2019], although it stores values in multi
ple cascades with varying spatial and angular resolutions, which
allows the algorithm to handle both ambient occlusion effects and
large scale environmental lighting with the same approach. In its
default formulation, it has noticeable artifacts manifesting as rings
around light sources, but there are ways to remove these, such
as the “Bilinear Fix” described in Osborne and Sannikov [2024].
Radiance Cascades is particularly good at handling diffuse GI, as its
behavior is independent of the number of light sources, however it
has errors when resolving small penumbras.

3 Background
We seek to calculate the fluence 𝐹 at positions in a 2D world,
defined as the radiance integrated across all directions at a point:
2𝜋

𝐹 (𝒑) ≔ ∫

𝐿(𝒑, 𝜔(𝜃))𝑑𝜃
⃗

where 𝑑 = ‖𝒒 − 𝒑‖ and 𝜔⃗ = (𝒒 − 𝒑)/𝑑 is the normalized direction
vector. Then, 𝐿(𝒑, 𝜔)⃗ = lim𝑑→∞ 𝐿𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒑 + 𝑑𝜔)⃗ simply by the
definition of the integral (although this would not be the case if
there was an environment map).
Now, let 𝒑, 𝒒, and 𝒓 be colinear points, with 𝒒 in the middle. By
𝑐
𝑏
𝑐
expanding Eq. 2 and using ∫ ⋅ = ∫ ⋅ + ∫ ⋅, we get that
𝑎
𝑎
𝑏
𝑇𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒓) = 𝑇𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒒) ⋅ 𝑇𝑟 (𝒒 ← 𝒓)
(5)
Using Eq. 4 and Eq. 5, we can also get a similar rule for radiance
intervals:
𝐿𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒓) = 𝐿𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒒) + 𝑇𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒒) ⋅ 𝐿𝑟 (𝒒 ← 𝒓) (6)
So, we can compute the radiance and transmittance of an interval
by decomposing it into smaller intervals. We show an example of
this in Fig. 2. Also notice that we can use Eq. 6 when 𝒒 is arbitrarily
far away, which allows us to compute 𝐿(𝒑, 𝜔)⃗ using the value at
𝐿(𝒑 + 𝑡𝜔,⃗ 𝜔)⃗ and the radiance and transmittance of the in between
interval. Defining ⟨𝑟, 𝑡⟩ to be the combined radiance interval and
transmittance pair, we express these as two formulas:
𝐌𝐞𝐫𝐠𝐞(⟨𝑟𝑛 , 𝑡𝑛 ⟩, ⟨𝑟𝑓 , 𝑡𝑓 ⟩) ≔ ⟨𝑟𝑛 + 𝑡𝑛 ⋅ 𝑟𝑓 , 𝑡𝑛 ⋅ 𝑡𝑓 ⟩ (7)
𝐌𝐞𝐫𝐠𝐞𝒓 (⟨𝑟𝑛 , 𝑡𝑛 ⟩, 𝑟𝑓 ) ≔ 𝑟𝑛 + 𝑡𝑛 ⋅ 𝑟𝑓

Notice how these are identical to the formulas for premultiplied
alpha blending, where the transmittance is 1 − 𝛼 [Porter and Duff
1984].
For convenience, we will define
𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞(𝒑, 𝒒) = ⟨𝐿𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒒), 𝑇𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒒)⟩
(9)

(1)

0

where 𝐿(𝒑, 𝜔)⃗ is the radiance at 𝒑 arriving from the normalized
direction vector 𝝎, and 𝜔(𝜃)
is the direction at angle 𝜃. In compari
⃗
son to irradiance, this does not have a cosine term, as there may not
be a surface at 𝒑. For simplicity, we will not concern ourselves with
multiple wavelengths of light, as they are typically independent.
In our model, we assume the world consists entirely of partic
ipating media, as surfaces can be modelled using highly dense
volumes by taking a modified version of the BRDF as the source
function. Thus, we define the transmittance 𝑇𝑟 as the fraction of
radiance transmitted between two points [Pharr et al. 2023, sec
11.2]:
𝑑

𝑇𝑟 (𝒑 ← 𝒒) ≔ exp(− ∫ 𝜎𝑡 (𝒑 + 𝑡𝜔,⃗ −𝜔)𝑑𝑡)
⃗

(8)

(2)

0

where 𝑑 = ‖𝒒 − 𝒑‖, 𝜔⃗ = (𝒒 − 𝒑)/𝑑 is the normalized direction
vector, and 𝜎𝑡 (𝒑, 𝜔)⃗ is the attenuation coefficient for the volume at
position 𝒑 in direction 𝜔.⃗
We can then compute the radiance by integrating the source
function 𝐿𝑠 (𝒑, 𝜔),
⃗ describing the emission and in scattering at 𝒑
in direction 𝜔⃗ over the ray:

𝒂 𝐿𝑟

=

.5
2, 𝑇𝑟 = 0
𝐿𝑟 = 0, 𝑇

𝑟 =1

𝒃

𝐿 𝑟 = 2, 𝑇𝑟

𝒄

𝐿𝑟 = 2, 𝑇

= 0.5

𝒅

𝑟 = 0.5

𝒆
Fig. 2. In this scene, both blocks attenuate the ray by 50%, and have
an emission of 𝐿𝑠 (𝒑, 𝜔)⃗ ⋅ 𝜎𝑡 (𝒑, 𝜔)⃗ = 4. Then, we have 𝐿𝑟 (𝒂 ← 𝒆) = 2,
𝑇𝑟 (𝒂 ← 𝒆) = 0.5, 𝑇𝑟 (𝒂 ← 𝒅) = 0.25, and 𝐿𝑟 (𝒂 ← 𝒅) = 3.

3.1 Radiance Cascades
Assume that all objects in the world have a minimum size of 1,
and that they are within 𝑎 distance from the origin. In order to
accurately approximate the fluence at the origin, we must use at
least 2𝜋𝑎 samples at the furthest edge to ensure that no features
are missed. The simplest way of doing this is by dividing the world
into 𝐼 = ⌈2𝜋𝑎⌉ cones:
𝐼−1

𝐹 (𝟎) = ∑ 𝐹𝑖

(10)

𝑖=0

where 𝐹𝑖 is the angular fluence for the 𝑖th cone, being the radiance
integrated from 2𝜋(𝑖 − 1)/𝐼 to 2𝜋𝑖/𝐼. We approximate it by sam

Holographic Radiance Cascades for 2D Global Illumination • 3

within an exponentially increasing interval (with the exception of
the base grid, which starts at 0), with an angular discretization
proportional to the starting distance, as in Fig. 3. We compute each
cascade from the next higher cascade, by tracing from the starting
point and then merging as in Eq. 12, with bilinear interpolation
used when probes are at different positions. The most common
setting for RC in 2 dimensions is to have each cascade level’s probe
grid have half the spatial resolution of the previous level — using
the observation that under most conditions, light from far away
sources is slowly varying — and quadruple the angular resolution
(which means that to make the ray spacing uniform, the starting
distance also increases in powers of 4). For a fixed area of interest,
this makes each cascade store the same number of values. We then
pick the number of cascades such that the combined ray length
exceeds the area of interest size.
However, standard RC cannot handle distant lights with a low
angular resolution. Let the base probe spacing be 𝐴 and ray length
be 𝐵, and then consider a light of a small size 𝑌 at a distance of 𝑋 ⋅
𝐵, occluded by an object at distance 𝑋⋅𝐵
2 such that the origin is in
the penumbra, as shown in Fig. 5. This penumbra will have width
𝑌 near the origin, however the probes that resolve the occluder
√
will be in cascade ≈ √
log4 (𝑋), and as such have spacing 𝑋 ⋅ 𝐴,
which means that if 𝑋 ⋅ 𝐴 > 𝑌 , RC is incapable of resolving it
accurately and produces interpolation artifacts, as can be seen in
Fig. 8.

Fig. 3. The conical frustums used to approximate the fluence at a point
in Radiance Cascades (left), and the rays used for three separate layers
of probes (right) — shrunken for visibility. Note that each cascade has a
quarter the probes of the previous level.

pling the radiance in the center of the cone (where 𝜔(𝜃)
is the
⃗
direction at angle 𝜃):
2𝜋
2𝜋(𝑖 + 0.5)
𝐹𝑖 =
𝐿(𝟎, 𝜔(
))
(11)
⃗
𝐼
𝐼
However this is inefficient, as at a distance of 𝑎2 , there only needs
to be 𝜋𝑎 samples to resolve the scene. Instead, assuming that 𝐼 is
even, we may separate the world into 𝐽 = 2𝐼 cones, each of which
is then further subdivided into 2 conical frustums after passing a
distance of 𝑎2 , and approximate all of these with single ray casts.
Consider the 𝑗th cone, with central axis 𝝎, and let 𝐹+ and 𝐹− be
the angular fluence of the frustums, approximated by tracing the
centers of them starting from 𝑎2 . We then approximate the angular
fluence and transmittance of the cone from 0 to 𝑎2 as ⟨𝑓𝑛 , 𝑡𝑛 ⟩ =
2𝜋
𝑎
⃗ where 𝐴 × ⟨𝑟, 𝑡⟩ = ⟨𝐴𝑟, 𝑡⟩ converts the radi
𝐼 × 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞(𝟎, 2 𝜔)
ance into angular fluence with arc 𝐴 and leaves the transmittance
unchanged, and 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞 is defined in Eq. 9.
The total angular fluence is then calculated as
𝐹𝑗 = 𝐌𝐞𝐫𝐠𝐞𝒓 (⟨𝑓𝑛 , 𝑡𝑛 ⟩, 𝐹+ + 𝐹− )
(12)
as 𝐌𝐞𝐫𝐠𝐞 can also operate on fluence values if they have the same
angular size.
We may then recursively repeat this for the 0 to 𝑎2 cone, stopping
when the cone length is less than the feature resolution, as shown
in Fig. 3 (left).
In standard Radiance Cascades (RC) [Sannikov 2023; Osborne
and Sannikov 2024], we discretize the world into multiple cascades
of grids of probes, each of which stores the fluence accumulated

𝑅0

𝑅1

√

𝑋⋅𝐴

𝑌

𝑋 ⋅ 𝐵/2

𝑋 ⋅ 𝐵/2

Fig. 5. The penumbra of a small light source. It’s impossible to reconstruct
the penumbra accurately near the left side
√ by interpolating values at these
probes when 𝑋 > 𝑌 .

4 Methodology
In Holographic Radiance Cascades (HRC), we solve this problem
by adjusting the probe positions so that there is always a high
spatial resolution of probes perpendicular to the angles the probe
is gathering from — we do not need to do this in both directions, as
a penumbra that is varying in both axes fast must be from a nearby
light source, and so is picked up by a lower cascade.

𝑅2

Fig. 4. The spatial positioning and extent of the first three cascades of probes in HRC, where the 𝑥-axis is vertical.

4 • Rouli Freeman, Alexander Sannikov, and Adrian Margel

To do this, we split the fluence arriving at the base layer of probes
into 4 quadrants, which can be combined at the end. Without loss of
generality, assume that we are only considering the angular fluence
between − 𝜋4 and 𝜋4 . In contrast to normal RC, which reduces the
spatial resolution in both directions every cascade level, we only
reduce the spatial resolution in the direction parallel to the probe’s
facing — so the 𝑛th level has probes at positions 𝒑 = (𝑥 ⋅ 2𝑛 , 𝑦), for
integer 𝑥, 𝑦. We then increase the angular resolution by a factor of 2
every level, as well as the distance each level traces before merging,
resulting in the same spacing between ray ends at every level.
More specifically, for the 𝑛th cascade, let 𝑖 be the index of the
direction taking on half integer values between 12 and 2𝑛 − 12 ,
inclusive. Then, let 𝑅𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑖) be our approximation to the angular
fluence of the cone starting at the probe 𝒑, with edges passing
through 𝒑 + 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑖 + 12 ) and 𝒑 + 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑖 − 12 ), as shown in Fig. 4,
where 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑘) ≔ (2𝑛 , 2𝑘 − 2𝑛 ) is the offset of the next probe in
direction 𝑘. For a given probe, the combination of all of its
cones then spans the entire arc between − 𝜋4 and 𝜋4 . If we define
angle([𝑥, 𝑦]) ≔ tan−1 (𝑦/𝑥) as the angle of a point from the origin,
we may compute the angular size of the cone in the 𝑖th direction
of a probe at cascade 𝑛 using this formula:
1
1
𝐴𝑛 (𝑖) ≔ angle(𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑖 + )) − angle(𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑖 − )) (13)
2
2
To compute our approximation to the angular fluence, we define
𝑅𝑛 recursively in terms of 𝑅𝑛+1 ; conceptually, we do this by
splitting the cone through the middle, and then approximating
each side by a thinner cone in the next cascade level: For a fixed
𝒑 = (𝑥 ⋅ 2𝑛 , 𝑦) and 𝑖, let 𝑅𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑖) = 𝐹+ + 𝐹− , where 𝐹+ and 𝐹−
are the contributions from the upper and lower halves of the cone
respectively. This has to be handled differently for odd and even 𝑥.
For odd 𝑥, there is no information for the 𝑛 + 1th cascade at 𝒑, so
we compute the cones by tracing along the edges of the cone until
we hit a probe in the higher cascade, which happens at 𝒒± = 𝒑 +
𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑖 ± 12 ) (with an x coordinate of (𝑥 + 1) ⋅ 2𝑛 ) and then merging
it with the angular fluence at that point in the closest direction,
which has index 𝑗± = 2𝑖 ± 12 , as shown in Fig. 6:
𝐹± = 𝐌𝐞𝐫𝐠𝐞𝒓 (𝐴𝑛+1 (𝑗± ) × 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞(𝒑, 𝒒± ), 𝑅𝑛+1 (𝒒± , 𝑗± )) (14)
For even 𝑥, it would be obvious to simply use 𝐹± = 𝑅𝑛+1 (𝒑, 𝑗± ),
since those perfectly match up with the upper and lower halves
of the 𝑅𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑖) cone. Unfortunately, this causes artifacts: the value
of 𝑅𝑛 computed using the previous formula for odd 𝑥 has a bias
towards the edges of the cone, so simply combining two cones
would cause a bias towards the middle that cannot be corrected
later. Instead, since 𝑅𝑛+1 does not exist at (𝑥 + 1) ⋅ 2𝑛 , we generate
the fluence by interpolating along the line from 𝒑 to 𝒒± = 𝒑 +
2𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑖 ± 12 ) as follows:
𝐹± = (𝐹±0 + 𝐹±1 )/2
(15)

𝑅0 𝑅1

𝑅3

𝑅2
𝑗+ =

11
2

𝒒+
9

5

𝑗− = 2

𝑖= 2

𝒑

𝒒−

Fig. 6. The first 4 cascades of 𝑅 used to calculate 𝑅0 ([0, 1], 0), showing in
particular the values used to compute 𝑅2 (𝒑 = [4, 1], 52 ) using Eq. 14.

4.1 Acceleration Structure
It is also possible to approximate the rays traced to generate the
HRC angular fluence values in an efficient manner:
For integers 𝑛, 𝑥, 𝑦, and 𝑘 ≤ 2𝑛 , let 𝑇𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑘) store an approxi
mation of 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞(𝒑, 𝒑 + 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑘)), where 𝒑 = (𝑥 ⋅ 2𝑛 , 𝑦). Then, for
odd 𝑥, we can replace the use of 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞(𝒑, 𝒑 + 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑖 ± 12 )) in 𝐹±
with 𝑇𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑖 ± 12 ). Similarly, for even 𝑥, 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞(𝒑, 𝒑 + 2𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑖 ±
1
⃗ (𝑘) = 𝑣𝑛+1
⃗ (2𝑘).
2 )) can be replaced with 𝑇𝑛+1 (𝒑, 2𝑖 ± 1), since 2𝑣𝑛
Now, we define 𝑇𝑛+1 recursively in terms of 𝑇𝑛 similarly to our
definition of 𝑅𝑛 , as shown in Fig. 7. If 2𝑘 is even, we can calculate
𝑇𝑛+1 (𝒑, 2𝑘) without any further approximation:
𝑇𝑛+1 (𝒑, 2𝑘) = 𝐌𝐞𝐫𝐠𝐞(𝑇𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑘), 𝑇𝑛 (𝒑 + 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑘), 𝑘)) (18)
as we can represent any ray as a combination of the near and far
halves. If 2𝑘 is odd, then the direction 𝑘 is not an integer, so we
cannot perform this. Instead, we blend the two closest approxima
tions: Let
𝐹± ≔ 𝐌𝐞𝐫𝐠𝐞(𝑇𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑘 ± 12 ),
(19)
𝑇𝑛 (𝒑 + 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑘 ± 12 ), 𝑘 ∓ 12 ))
and then we can compute 𝑇𝑛+1 as:
𝑇𝑛+1 (𝒑, 2𝑘) = (𝐹− + 𝐹+ )/2

(20)

where:
𝐹±0 ≔ 𝑅𝑛+1 (𝒑, 𝑗± )

(16)

𝐹±1 ≔ 𝐌𝐞𝐫𝐠𝐞𝒓 (𝐴𝑛+1 (𝑗± ) × 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞(𝒑, 𝒒± ), 𝑅𝑛+1 (𝒒± , 𝑗± )) (17)

Fig. 7. Combining rays from 𝑇2 to generate 𝑇3 , where the 𝑥-axis is vertical.

Holographic Radiance Cascades for 2D Global Illumination • 5

4.2 Implementation
Algorithm 1: Single bounce lighting using HRC
Procedure HRC(𝑋, 𝑌 ):
for 𝑛 in 0 to 2:
for 𝑥 in 0..⌈𝑋/2𝑛 ⌉, 𝑦 in 0..𝑌 , 𝑘 in 0..2𝑛 + 1:
let 𝒑 = (𝑥 ⋅ 2𝑛 , 𝑦)
𝑇𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑘) ≔ 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞(𝒑, 𝒑 + 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑘))
for 𝑛 in 3 to ⌈log2 (𝑋)⌉:
for 𝑥 in 0..⌈𝑋/2𝑛 ⌉, 𝑦 in 0..𝑌 , 𝑘 in 0..2𝑛 + 1:
let 𝒑 = (𝑥 ⋅ 2𝑛 , 𝑦)
if 𝑘 is even:
Compute 𝑇𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑘) from 𝑇𝑛−1 using Eq. 18
else:
Compute 𝑇𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑘) from 𝑇𝑛−1 using Eq. 20
for 𝑛 in ⌈log2 (𝑋)⌉ − 1 to 0:
for 𝑥 in 0..⌈𝑋/2𝑛 ⌉, 𝑦 in 0..𝑌 , 𝑖 in 0..2𝑛 :
let 𝒑 = (𝑥 ⋅ 2𝑛 , 𝑦)
if 𝑥 is even:
Compute 𝐹+ , 𝐹− from 𝑅𝑛+1 , 𝑇𝑛+1 using Eq. 15
else:
Compute 𝐹+ , 𝐹− from 𝑅𝑛+1 , 𝑇𝑛 using Eq. 14
𝑅𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑖) = 𝐹+ + 𝐹−
return 𝑅0
Procedure Lighting(𝑋, 𝑌 ):
for dir in 0..4:
𝑅0 ≔ HRC(𝑋, 𝑌 )
for 𝑥 in 0..𝑋, 𝑦 in 0..𝑌 :
𝐿([𝑥, 𝑦]) += 𝑅0 ([𝑥 + 1, 𝑦], 0)
Rotate world by 90°.
Rotate 𝐿 by 90°.
Swap 𝑋, 𝑌 .
return 𝐿

Assume that we want to compute fluence for a 𝑋 × 𝑌 grid, where
all light sources are positioned within it. In order to do this, we split
the fluence into the four quadrants, which we handle separately.
Consider the angular fluence arriving from the +x quadrant. For an
integer position [𝑥, 𝑦], we can approximate this using the first level
cascade information, 𝑅0 ([𝑥 + 1, 𝑦], 0) — this offset is necessary
to prevent bias as can be seen in Fig. 12: if it was removed, the
diagonal rays of different quadrants would overlap, which results
in crosses of increased brightness. 𝑅0 then depends on values
𝑅1 …𝑅𝑁−1 where 𝑁 = ⌈log2 (𝑋)⌉ — any lookups of 𝑅𝑁 or greater
would be at 𝑥 = 2𝑁 , and so are uniformly 0 as there are no lights
beyond the region.1 In order to compute these, we approximate
the 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞(𝒑, 𝒑 + 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑘)) values using the acceleration structure
described in Section 4.1. We manually initialize 𝑇𝑛 (𝒑, 𝑘) =
𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞(𝒑, 𝒑 + 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑘)) using a standard raytracing method for 𝑛 =
0, 1, 2 to reduce error, as the cost to trace the short rays is relatively
small and the error from odd direction merging is magnified the
shorter the ray is.2 For 𝑛 = 3…𝑁 , we compute 𝑇𝑛 from 𝑇𝑛−1 using
Eq. 18 and Eq. 20 — note that we need 𝑇𝑁 in order to evaluate even
1 Handling offscreen lights can then be done by simply computing 𝑅

𝑁 via a different
method such as cone tracing. For environment map use (assuming no occluders
outside of bounds), simply look up the value of the map in the direction of 𝑣𝑁
⃗ (𝑖).
2 Importantly, the total number of directions of outgoing radiance from an object is
limited by the number of rays traced (in contrast to the values generated via merging),
which in this case is 4 ⋅ (22 + 1) = 20. This can result in degraded quality of specular
reflections as the BRDF is functionally blurred.

𝑥 values of 𝑅𝑁−1 . Then, from 𝑛 = 𝑁 − 1 to 𝑛 = 0, we evaluate 𝑅𝑛
using 𝑅𝑛+1 , 𝑇𝑛 , and 𝑇𝑛+1 , using Eq. 14 and Eq. 15 (treating 𝑅𝑁 as
uniformly 0). Finally, after summing up all 4 quadrants of fluence,
we apply a 1px cross blur, using the kernel
0 1 0
1[
]
1 4 1]
(21)
8[
0
1
0
[
]
and ignoring the probes that differ significantly in opacity from the
target. This is necessary, as Holographic Radiance Cascades results
in checkerboard artifacts — notice that 𝑣𝑛⃗ (𝑘) is always a multiple
of 2 for any 𝑛 ≥ 1, which results in the probes with odd and even 𝑦
values not interacting; for example, in Fig. 6, all probes except for
the first level have odd 𝑦 values.
For multiple diffuse bounces, we can simply feed the output
fluence values into another iteration of the algorithm (which can
be done temporally). However, the output fluence only has 4 direc
tions, which prevents it from being used for specular reflections.
This could be solved by looking up the higher cascade angular
fluence values instead, although we have not implemented that.

4.3 Performance Analysis
We will compute the theoretical time and space for this implemen
tation. For a 𝑋 × 𝑋 size grid, where 𝑋 = 2𝑁 for an integer 𝑁 ,
𝑅𝑛 has 2𝑁−𝑛 ⋅ 2𝑁 ⋅ 2𝑛 = 4𝑁 = 𝑋 2 values, and 𝑇𝑛 has 2𝑁−𝑛 ⋅ 2𝑁 ⋅
(2𝑛 + 1) = 4𝑁 ⋅ (1 + 2−𝑛 ) ≤ 2𝑋 2 values, and there are 𝑁 total
cascades of 𝑅, and 𝑁 + 1 cascades of 𝑇 .

4.3.1 Speed. Each cascade requires executing a constant time
algorithm per value within 𝑅𝑛 to compute it from 𝑅𝑛+1 , which
requires 𝑂(𝑁 ⋅ 𝑋 2 ) total time. This also depends on computing
𝑇𝑛 , which requires 𝑂((𝑁 + 1) ⋅ 2𝑋 2 ) time as well, resulting in
𝑂(𝑋 2 log 𝑋) total time. Computing 𝑇0 to 𝑇2 also requires 4 ⋅ 𝑋 2 ⋅
(3 + 1 + 12 + 14 ) = 19𝑋 2 invocations of an unaccelerated 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞
(multiplying
by the number of quadrants), for ray lengths no longer
√
than 4 2, with the majority of them being at most half as long.
4.3.2 Memory. Let 𝑉𝑟 and 𝑉𝑡 be the size in bytes of a single fluence
or radiance value and a single transmittance value, respectively.
Then, the size of 𝑅𝑛 is 4𝑁 ⋅ 𝑉𝑟 , and the size of 𝑇𝑛 is 4𝑁 ⋅ (1 +
2−𝑛 ) ⋅ (𝑉𝑟 + 𝑉𝑡 ). We only need to store 2 layers of 𝑅 at a single
time, since our output only needs to be 𝑅0 , and each layer only
depends on the next higher one, so the storage for the fluence is 2 ⋅
4𝑁 ⋅ 𝑉𝑟 . However, each layer of 𝑅𝑛 depends on 𝑇𝑛 and 𝑇𝑛+1 , so we
must store each layer of the acceleration structure separately, re
𝑁
sulting in total storage for it being ∑0 4𝑁 ⋅ (1 + 2−𝑛 ) ⋅ (𝑉𝑟 + 𝑉𝑡 )
−𝑁
𝑁
= (𝑁 + 3 + 2 ) ⋅ 4 ⋅ (𝑉𝑟 + 𝑉𝑡 ) ≈ 𝑁 ⋅ 4𝑁 ⋅ (𝑉𝑟 + 𝑉𝑡 ) for large
𝑁 . This makes up the majority of the memory cost, but can be
avoided via use of a different acceleration structure such as a BVH
for 𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐞, which would bring it down to 2 ⋅ 4𝑁 ⋅ 𝑉𝑟 (discounting
the cost for that acceleration structure). Note that each of the four
quadrants can reuse the same memory if the grid is square.
4.3.3 Ray Count. Each element of 𝑇𝑛 is a ray interval used to
compute the result, so we need a total of 4(𝑁 + 3 + 2−𝑁 ) ray
calculations per output fluence value, assuming no use of the
acceleration structure. This works out to 52 per base probe for a
1024 × 1024 sized grid. With our acceleration structure settings,

6 • Rouli Freeman, Alexander Sannikov, and Adrian Margel

HRC

1.85 ms, RMSE 0.0184
PT + NEE — 10spp

Reference

1.55 ms, RMSE 0.00711
PT — 600spp

RC

109 ms, RMSE 0.0260

1.96 ms, RMSE 0.0354

Fig. 8. The penumbra of a 14 pixel wide occluder illuminated using a 10 pixel circular light, shown using HRC, path tracing (PT), and standard RC. All results
simulated on a 512 × 512 grid, with RMSE computed on the displayed area to accentuate differences in the penumbra.

we only need 19 rays per base probe, which are all less than 6 times
the base spacing.

5 Results
We implement our algorithm in Rust, using the LuisaCompute
framework [Zheng et al. 2022] as an abstraction over CUDA, and
execute on a NVIDIA RTX 3080 Laptop GPU. We take in the
scene as a 512 × 512 or 1024 × 1024 pixel image, and produce
an equal resolution fluence grid. To generate 𝑇0 ..𝑇2 , we trace the
rays using the DDA algorithm by Amanatides and Woo [1987], and
integrate the radiance and transmittance analytically within each
pixel of the scene, treating it as a square of uniform extinction and
emission [Pharr et al. 2023, sec 11.2]. We store the radiance and
transmittance values using 3 vectors of 16 bit floats without any
compression. As our algorithm does not branch based on the scene
data, it has constant time for a given size, as shown in Table 1.
Note that in an actual renderer, the output fluence would likely
be interpolated from these probes onto a screen 2x or 4x the size
(merging with rays traced to the probes to avoid light leaks); this
makes the algorithm significantly more feasible to run in combi
nation with other GPU usage. However, we have decided to avoid
this, as it detracts from the actual results.
As there are no standard test scenes for 2D, we choose to
make our own. In contrast to guided path tracing algorithms,
HRC functions independently from the quantity of light sources
or the complexity of the geometry, so, we’ve chosen to test simple
Table 1. Performance timings for HRC on a 3080 Laptop GPU. “Merge Up”
represents the computation of 𝑇0 ..𝑇𝑁 , while “Merge Down” represents
computing 𝑅𝑁−1 ..𝑅0
Size

Merge Up

Merge Down

Total

256 × 256

0.30 ms

0.25 ms

0.55 ms

512 × 512

1.00 ms

0.85 ms

1.85 ms

1024 × 1024

4.10 ms

3.57 ms

7.67 ms

2048 × 2048

18.1 ms

15.8 ms

33.9 ms

scenes, as that makes it easier to understand the effectiveness of
our approach. Similarly, we also do not run multiple iterations
for multibounce GI, apart from in Fig. 14, as that generally makes
things blurrier and harder to compare.
For comparison, we implement a path tracer, which uses the
golden ratio low discrepancy sequence for generating rays [Wolfe
2020], and two level DDA with 8 × 8 pixel blocks to trace them
[Museth 2014]. We also show use of next event estimation (NEE)
[Pharr et al. 2023, sec 13.2], which we perform by sampling rays
within the angle subtended by the bounding box of the light. Note
that this requires knowledge about the scene, which usually would
require additional computation to produce.

5.0.1 Occluder. Our first scene is a single light source and
occluder, shown in Fig. 8. In comparison to the reference, HRC
blurs the shadow by around 4 pixels, but produces nearly identical
results otherwise.
We show two different path traced images. This is the best scene
for a NEE based tracer due to the simplicity, and indeed it has the
lowest error, however it still has noticeable noise in the penumbra.
The naive path tracer takes a long time to converge, as the light
source has a small angular size, and correspondingly has a large
error. However, since it isn’t guided, increasing the complexity of
the scene would not reduce the quality of the output.
We also compare to an optimized Radiance Cascades implemen
tation [Sannikov 2023], which we have adjusted for an equal time
comparison. The background gradient resolves accurately, as RC
uses a similar method to ensure full coverage of the scene. How
ever, the shadow quality is significantly worse, resulting in twice
the RMSE of HRC — towards the right of the scene, the cascade
level that picks up the light is increased, which results in not
enough spatial resolution to pick up the penumbra.
5.0.2 Pinhole. In Fig. 9, we test a pinhole camera scene. For this,
we compare to a path traced image using an equal number of
samples per pixel; while it produces a distinguishable image, it still
has plenty of noise — the majority of the light source is occluded,
which results in the next event estimation producing poor results.

Holographic Radiance Cascades for 2D Global Illumination • 7

In contrast, HRC resolves this without any noise in a quarter of the
time, which shows that it is capable of efficiently simulating large
light sources and light transfer through small gaps.
HRC — 52spp

7.67 ms, RMSE 0.0095
PT + NEE — 52spp

30.5 ms, RMSE 0.0139
Fig. 9. Light passing through a 10 pixel wide pinhole, simulated using HRC
and path tracing with next event estimation (PT + NEE), both on a 1024 ×
1024 grid.

5.0.3 Artifacts. Our algorithm demonstrates two forms of arti
facts apart from over blurring. The most noticeable one is that it
has checkerboard patterns. For example, using the scene in Fig. 8,
we can see a pattern near the edge of the shadow, as in Fig. 10 (a).
This is significantly lessened after applying the cross blur in Eq. 21,
which results in Fig. 10 (b).

(a) Without filtering
(b) With filtering
Fig. 10. View of the occluder in Fig. 8, showing the checkerboard pattern.

It also demonstrates Moiré pattern like behavior, especially with
small lights. This is due to aliasing from the ray segments being
fixed — a small change in the displayed pixel could result in a
significant change in brightness, as the light could change from
intersecting 2 rays to 3, for example. This can be seen in Fig. 11.
Luckily, this is much less of an issue for large light sources as
they have more samples, and generally ceases to be a concern for
sources larger than 8 times the base probe resolution: see how Fig. 1
does not have this, and in Fig. 8, it is barely visible.

Fig. 11. A 2x2-pixel light, rendered using HRC (left), as well as the difference
between it and a reference image, with the scale measuring from −0.2%
to 0.2% of the light intensity.

5.0.4 Volumetrics. A major benefit of our algorithm is that it
can handle detailed volumetrics efficiently. Common acceleration
structures rely on empty space skipping, which does not work for
volumes that continuously vary in material, such as clouds. For ex
ample, the scene in Fig. 13 has high detail across the entire domain,
due to the varying levels of opacity and the fractal surface. This
results in path tracing taking 12x as long for the same number of
samples (1310 ms for 600spp), compared to a mostly empty scene
such as Fig. 8, while our algorithm is unchanged.

6 Conclusion
We have demonstrated a new method for 2D Global Illumination
that provides consistent high quality for all scenes with a large
enough feature size. We do this by reformulating Radiance Cas
cades using a grid that decreases in resolution in only one direction
to avoid shadow artifacts, and provide an acceleration structure
that does not rely upon empty space skipping, which allows for
consistent performance and simple volumetric handling.
The primary limitation of the current formulation of HRC is
the artifacts that become visible when light sources are smaller
than 8 times the base probe resolution. It also has poor scaling in
3 dimensions, taking up 𝑁 4 memory for a 𝑁 × 𝑁 × 𝑁 scene —
although it remains feasible for small volumes, as seen in Fig. 15.
For future work, it is worth investigating methods of distributing
the computation across frames, such as caching unchanged parts
of the world, or jittering rays in order to increase accuracy. The
acceleration structure currently takes up almost all the memory
footprint, so compressing it, or using a different method would
allow for larger scenes. Finally, combining HRC with a glossy GI
method would significantly improve sharp reflections.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Christopher Osborne, Asbjørn Lystrup, and
Manu Udupa for their assistance in proofreading.

8 • Rouli Freeman, Alexander Sannikov, and Adrian Margel

𝑅3

𝑅2

𝑅1
𝑅0

Fig. 12. The cones that make up the fluence at a single pixel computed
using HRC, using the merging strategy for odd 𝑥 — the equivalent for RC
is shown in Fig. 3 (left), although interpolation would be used at every
level. Note how the traced rays (the cone edges) cover the entire area semiuniformly.

Fig. 13. A rendering of the Julia set for 𝑐 = −0.835 − 0.2321𝑖 with
volumetric parameters determined by the escape iteration of the pixel
(left), and the occupied blocks in the 2-level DDA acceleration structure
(right). HRC produces results indistinguishable from the reference (RMSE
0.00498). Simulated on a 512 × 512 grid.

Fig. 14. A 512 × 512 cornell box with a solid circle and a volumetric
scattering rectangle, with diffuse reflecting walls. The shadows are not
perfectly dark due to the reflections off of the sides. Converged after 6
bounces (temporally accumulated).

Fig. 15. A single-bounce rendering of a 128 × 128 × 128 voxel scene using
an experimental 3D HRC implementation. Note that the volumetrics can be
done without any added cost. Surface normals have not been implemented,
which results in the irregular shadowing.

Holographic Radiance Cascades for 2D Global Illumination • 9

References
John Amanatides and Andrew Woo. 1987. A Fast Voxel Traversal Algorithm for Ray
Tracing. Proceedings of EuroGraphics 87 (Aug. 1987). http://www.cse.yorku.ca/~
amana/research/grid.pdf.
Grinding Gear Games. 2024. Path of Exile 2. https://pathofexile2.com/.
Wojciech Jarosz, Volker Schönefeld, Leif Kobbelt, and Henrik Wann Jensen. 2012.
Theory, Analysis and Applications of 2D Global Illumination. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH) 31, 5 (Sep. 2012), 125:1–125:21. https://
doi.org/10/gbbrkb.
Zander Majercik, Jean Philippe Guertin, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, and Morgan
McGuire. 2019. Dynamic Diffuse Global Illumination with Ray Traced Irradiance
Fields. Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques (JCGT) 8, 2 (Jun. 2019), 1–30.
http://jcgt.org/published/0008/02/01/.
Ken Museth. 2014. Hierarchical digital differential analyzer for efficient ray marching
in OpenVDB. ACM SIGGRAPH 2014 Talks (2014), Article 40. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2614106.2614136.
Christopher M. J. Osborne and Alexander Sannikov. 2024. Radiance Cascades: A
Novel High Resolution Formal Solution for Multidimensional Non LTE Radiative
Transfer. https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.14425.
Matt Pharr, Wenzel Jakob, and Greg Humphreys. 2023. Physically Based Rendering:
From Theory To Implementation. https://pbr book.org/4ed/Light_Transport_I_
Surface_Reflection/Path_Tracing.
Thomas Porter and Tom Duff. 1984. Compositing digital images. Computer Graphics
18, 3 (Jan. 1984), 253–259. https://doi.org/10.1145/964965.808606.
Alexander Sannikov. 2023. Radiance Cascades: A Novel Approach to Calculating
Global Illumination. https://github.com/Raikiri/RadianceCascadesPaper.
Alan Wolfe. 2020. Irrational Numbers. https://blog.demofox.org/2020/07/26/
irrational numbers/.
Shaokun Zheng, Zhiqian Zhou, Xin Chen, et al. 2022. LuisaRender: A High Perfor
mance Rendering Framework with Layered and Unified Interfaces on Stream
Architectures. ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH) 41, 6
(Nov. 2022), 232:1–232:19. https://doi.org/10.1145/3550454.3555463.

