Alexander: @RadianceCausality @AdrianM new home
RadianceCausality: It's line time
AdrianM: it has become its own rabbit hole
Alexander: so in flatland we store N values associated with each HRC probe. in usual HRC these values are radiance coming from the center of the probe in N directions. however, if we use any of our linespace encoding techniques, then these N values encode radiance in a _volume_ associated with the probe. or they encode a bundle associated with that probe
Alexander: what does that mean
Alexander: is that a useful property or just a quirk?
Alexander: is this what's causing aliasing in sparse 3d? the fact that we(I?) treat each ray origin as the center of its probe?
Alexander: should we be doing interpolation between blocks/rings or should that not be a problem? quite surprisingly so far it was not a problem for me, i don't know why
Alexander: i don't see any seams between blocks, even though each block encodes its linespace chunk in complete isolation from its neighbours
Alexander: so I was wondering. what is the difference between a good and a bad discretization pattern?
Alexander: like, what's the difference between vanilla 2x vs vanilla 4x scaling?
Alexander: what if we did something clearly sub-optimal with probe scaling (for example, imagine HRC where we reduce the number of probes 2x and increase the number of directions 4x while spacing between planes is kept the same?
Alexander: i think linespace has the potential to answer this question
Alexander: there has to be some notion of uniformity of our sampling pattern, and it has to stay in some sense uniform from cascade to cascade
AdrianM: Yes, I believe as we increase the grid resolution the falloff decreases. If you imagine the line being infinitely thin then only the single point would line up with it and all other alignments would have 0 effect
Alexander: i think line space discretization like this should be legal
Alexander: essentially the number of discrete directions and the number of discrete positions that we have should not necessarily be the same
Alexander: in fact, I don't even know if c0 probes should be what we see on the left or what we see on the right:
Alexander: we have always been doing what's on the right. but is that the right call?
Alexander: i wonder what HRC does if we were to formulate as the left diagram
Alexander: hmm... i also just now realized that these two are basically equivalent:
tomatopaste: looks like a double slit experiment
Alexander: so... do we ever need this? because if the answer is that we can always find an equivalent arrangement that has the same number of points on the left/right line, then it just makes everything much easier and have fewer parameters
Alexander: if it turns out that it's not equivalent, then life is pain again
Alexander: i just realized that for an arbitrary arrangement of HRC probes (with any spacing and any number of directions per probe), we can always construct an equivalent line indexing scheme between two vertical lines that have evenly spaced indices and left-right line indexing for them
Alexander: so no matter how many directions each probe has, no matter the distance, there are always 2 planes with uniformly spaced points that if you connect them you'll get the same spacial and angular sampling density
Alexander: i wonder if the way of encoding it with lines gives us the answer of where we should be using that interpolation. does it mean in order for interpolation to work like interpolation and not extrapolation (with additional losses) we should be reconstructing radiance between those planes and not outside of them?
Alexander: does this mean that there are always 2 "focal planes" for which we can reconstruct radiance with the best accuracy?
Alexander: testing linespace discretization per block
Alexander: i wonder why there are segments with two brightness levels o_O
Alexander: interesting. this is what's happening inside of one block/probe with angle + distance from center encoding scheme
Alexander: fewer lines per block
Alexander: i don't think it's broken. i think it's doing what it's meant to be doing, it's just what the angle+distance basis does
Alexander: man.. apparently just encoding radiance within a box in an efficient way is already not easy
Alexander: how do we map the space of (0..1)x(0..1) onto the space of all lines in a square in a way that's efficient?
Alexander: even using 4 cardinal directions this is not easy if you want every line to be visible at least partially
Alexander: @fad sounds like the kind of self contained problem that you're good at solving
AdrianM: Whoops
AdrianM: [image]
Alexander: Adrian, you too. i think sampling all lines in a box is an important thing that we should have a solution for
Alexander: and it's a building block (no pun intended) for many things we can build on top of it
Alexander: it's literally rings that you were inventing, but rings have a bunch of rays unused
Alexander: [image]
Alexander: hmm... i wonder what if we generate 2 circle points on 2 random circle segments that have non-matching colors?
AdrianM: I'm thinking about solving it in 1 direction
AdrianM: Classic HRC
AdrianM: Reproject the penumbra to be defined at different planes as a way of changing basis functions between cascades
AdrianM: Still not sure if that's possible or quite what the limitations might be
Alexander: you mean one quadrant? even that is not easy to define in a box
Alexander: how do you define the set of all lines within one quadrant in a box?
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Easy peasy
Alexander: not at all
AdrianM: It won't give a circular fall off
AdrianM: But that's fine for now
Alexander: [image]
Alexander: none of these lines are represented
AdrianM: One second
AdrianM: I have things taken apart to do some testing
Alexander: tl;dr, to cover the entire box you don't need 2 of these, you need 6 (also connecting all sets of edges at 90 degrees)
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: You can see how it all adds up and click together
AdrianM: I'm sure you are ahead of me on this
AdrianM: I just want to solve the simple diamond case before considering more complicated cases
AdrianM: If a lossless way to shift basis functions can't be found for even the default case then I need to do some rethinking
AdrianM: Any shape in line space which we can create a geometric defintion for in real space is fair game
AdrianM: As long as we can manipulate that shape in order to build a bigger version of itself
Alexander: yes it's 6 zones like these
AdrianM: There may be some other hidden requirements
AdrianM: 6 zones, but really only 2 unique cases. The corners and the main 2 edges.
Alexander: yes but i'm not sure how to map one uv range (0..1)x(0..1) into 6x zones (0..1)x(0..1) each in a way that's uniform
AdrianM: This is stepping ahead of what I've been thinking about.
AdrianM: But right now splitting into these zones is basically just connecting all the nodes on the boundary of a box
AdrianM: I believe you've found from your testing that that isn't uniform
AdrianM: But a circle is uniform
AdrianM: Both a circular boundary and a square boundary contain all lines within some arbitrary scene. But they contain different weightings for those lines.
AdrianM: So I'd assume we can just reweight the lines in the square boundary to match the circular boundary
AdrianM: Also as a quick side note. Covering the entire unit square in linespace isn't that useful. It's just the same as covering all angles in some range for all points in some y range.
AdrianM: [image]
Alexander: hmm... what if we overlapped them
Alexander: by 1/2
Alexander: what if we tile the line space with rectangles like that
AdrianM: Yeah, that is possible
Alexander: wait a minute, this is what classic HRC basis is
AdrianM: As a side note, look at this
AdrianM: This is basically drawing the two connected lines as an X through the square
AdrianM: No idea if it's useful but it's certainly interesting
AdrianM: It hints at other geometric definitions for basic functions we could use to tile the scene in linespace
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: This might help you see how I'm making it
Alexander: hmm.. how do we tile the space with rhombi?..
Alexander: what does that grid look like?
AdrianM: Oh that's easy
Alexander: no how does the grid look like in realspace vs linespace?
AdrianM: Easy
Alexander: ok i think i know how to formulate that question. can we have a tiling in realspace such that bundles associated with every tile also form a tiling in the linespace?
AdrianM: [image]
Alexander: hmm.. i see
AdrianM: Literally moving the yellow line is a translation
Alexander: so these are 2 intersecting diagonals defining a linespace bundle?
AdrianM: And the pink line is a different translation
Alexander: i want realspace tiles to be squares
AdrianM: And if you stretch the pink/yellow then that's the same as stretching the rhombus in that direction
Alexander: to build an octree
AdrianM: That doesn't give us shadows
Alexander: why do you think so
AdrianM: Well, hmmm
AdrianM: Okay let me show you what that does exactly
Alexander: i do want to implement it with occlusion
Alexander: in fact, all lines contained within a given square is how you add occlusion
Alexander: this is interesting
Alexander: deranged but interesting
Alexander: intersecting diagonals bundle, hmm...
Alexander: annoyingly it samples a bunch of lines outside of the rhombus?
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Here you can see what the linespace tiling looks like and the geometric definition
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: And here you can see what happens if we scale it up a cascade
AdrianM: Well the geometric definition is still between the same two x planes
AdrianM: So it isn't splitting up the real space in a way that gives us shadows
AdrianM: At least I'm not seeing how it would
AdrianM: If we want to change squish the geometric definition to be between two different x planes then it stretches the linespace
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: You can pretty clearly see that that changes the angle in linespace though, so we need a way to achieve that new angle
AdrianM: Obviously just translation isn't going to cut it
AdrianM: Which is brings us back to what I was ranting about before
AdrianM: What if we literally cut it
AdrianM: Cut the rhombus in half
AdrianM: Which if we consider the rhombus to be an umbra then a triangle turns out to be equivalent to a penumbra
AdrianM: And now we get to think about triangles in linespace instead of rhombus
AdrianM: Anyways, I already gave this rant and I already think I've lost everyone on this rabbit hole lol
AdrianM: I'll keep going and let you all know if I find anything at the bottom
Alexander: hmm... triangular tiling
Alexander: sounds like a pain in 3d
AdrianM: Wonder what the 3D equivalent is
AdrianM: I suppose it'd be slicing a box in half
AdrianM: A tetrahedron
AdrianM: Eh, let's just get it solved for 2D first
AdrianM: I want to know if even in the best case a lossless solution can exist
AdrianM: Ignoring these questions doesn't change the problem, linespace lets us see the complexity of the problem pretty directly
Alexander: apparently this works reasonably well
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Boom
AdrianM: These are all the ways we can reproject a rhombus
AdrianM: Technically there are 6 in total, but the first two are use the same planes as the original (red) definition
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Here is what it looks like
AdrianM: All the other definitions look exactly the same by definition since they are just different ways of geometrically capturing the same data
AdrianM: I know what you are thinking "what about projections in the opposite direction?"
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: It turns out it is symetrical
AdrianM: The distances we can project to are dependent on the relative sizes of the two defining edges
AdrianM: So if the right edge is bigger than the left then we can only project towards the left
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Interesting, the penumbra (triangle) can be split in half allowing for another projection option
AdrianM: Although that would require twice as many shapes to describe
AdrianM: Here's what the rendered penumbra looks like
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Hmmm that's actually very odd
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: We can reproject to this plane
AdrianM: But what's so special about that plane?
AdrianM: In the case of a full umbra it makes sense for that point to be special since it's where the lines cross
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: But for a penumbra that point doesn't look particularly special at all
AdrianM: I wonder if that implies arbitrary reprojection of penumbra is possible by splitting them into smaller pieces?
AdrianM: The answer to that question is yes!
AdrianM: [image]
fad: maybe something like: for a given line, find where it intersects the boundaries of the square. choose the intersection where the angle the line makes with the normal of that intersection is -45º < angle < 45º. now use (angle, intersectionPosition)?

intersectionPosition can be compressed to 1D since it lies on the boundary of a square
Alexander: the mapping is the other way round, from two 0..1 components of uv that define a ray to a ray in realspace
Alexander: well, we need mapping to work both ways
Alexander: can you make an illustration? maybe i'm missing what you're trying to do
AdrianM: This same logic extends to any arbitrary distance
AdrianM: Looks like we can reproject at least one of the planes to any distance we want just by splitting the penumbra into two smaller penumbra
AdrianM: Any obviously if each of those two penumbra are split in half again then with 4 penumbra we can reproject both planes
AdrianM: Not sure if it is possible to do better than that. There are special distances where a penumbra can be reprojected without being split. There might also be a way to do reprojection of both lines without requiring two splits.
AdrianM: Though in the context of implementing HRC that may not matter
AdrianM: Hmmm actually it seems there may be some restrictions on penumbra reprojection
AdrianM: I'm not entirely sure what those restrictions are
Alexander: testing different bases(basises?)
Alexander: [image]
Alexander: found the right weights
Alexander: wow the difference with circular basis is pretty dramatic
Alexander: i think there's something special about this basis that makes it appear very regular, interesting. they have the same number of lines but just appear to look different
Alexander: i don't immediately see how to generalize this basis to 3d yet, unfortunately
RadianceCausality: which basis is this?
Alexander: like this
Alexander: points are spaced equally on the diagonal, same number of lines regardless of direction
Alexander: angle is chosen uniformly
Alexander: so ray angle is one coordinate, the other coordinate is a point on the nearest diagonal
Alexander: for some reason this works much better than picking points on the perimeter
RadianceCausality: huh
Alexander: i think one important property is to make lines change as little as possible with any coordinate change
Alexander: and putting it on a diagonal sort of balances that
Goobley: This is starting to look like method of characteristics solvers from neutron transport...
Alexander: well... there is no advection happening really
Goobley: characteristics is kind of a silly name, but it's to do with the way they oversample each cell with rays to extract the right average flux
Alexander: i thought characteristic methods is methods that use the property of some hyperbolic systems that they look like advection/diffusion after some transformation
Alexander: where advection happens along characteristics
Alexander: is it something else?
Goobley: It is in hydrodynamics, but for neutron transport it just refers to lots of ray samples
Alexander: hm diagram is indeed similar for some reason
Alexander: okay yeah there is some randomly happening resemblance in the method too
Goobley: It's the same concept I guess, oversampling to get the average through a control volume, that for you just happens to be a pixel
Alexander: i don't have pixels btw
Alexander: well, almost
Alexander: these are just boxes and discretized bundles of lines in them
Alexander: pixels only happen when i enter c0 and then gather per pixel fluence once i'm done
Goobley: Oh right
Goobley: Are you assigning some "track width" to each ray when filling the boxes?
Alexander: since lines are indexed by integer indices, the "track" that corresponds to each line is the set of all lines that have indices in the -0.5..+0.5 range from it
Alexander: but the track is 2d because the indices are 2d
Alexander: https://discord.com/channels/1277053173764460625/1304556173671927878/1471463788459851870 this is what these tracks look like
Alexander: so it's like a ribbon with a twist rather than a rectangle
Goobley: Ah, it's still that basis then, right. It's interesting how smooth it looks yeah
Alexander: well there is literally no other choice, that basis will appear any time you try to enumerate lines in a continuous way
Alexander: it's just the set of all lines that connect two surface elements
Goobley: I guess the difference between this and the neutron MOC stuff is that they assume a fixed angular discretisation, so the set looks quite different. I feel like this is more general though
Alexander: fixed angular discretization should also result in the same shape, because if you consider the set of all rays that start on a surface element ds and are contained inside of angle dtheta, they'll form the same shape
Alexander: maybe they just never felt the need to visualize them?
Goobley: I guess specifically thinking in terms of pairs of edges is new to me
Alexander: so curiously the bundle shape is different if you think of two surface elements vs surface element + angle. and i still don't understand what that means.
Goobley: @IronFist maybe knows more about whether people have thought more about these bases in MOC stuff
Alexander: basically classic HRC uses surface element + angle. i have now switched to two surface elements because it's more contained/spreads less
Goobley: I feel like the two surface elements should give a better description of the average, rather than the pointwise flux, yeah
Alexander: exploring 3 bases where all rays are drawn
Alexander: circular (2 points on a sphere):
Alexander: diagonal (point on a diagonal + angle)
Alexander: up/down: one point on the upper line, one point on the lower line
Alexander: lower line + angle
Alexander: even though the last 2 look more uniform-ish, they actually don't cover the full 360 space of line directions, unfortunately. the first 2 do
fad: rediscovery https://discord.com/channels/1277053173764460625/1280001146932559972/1284029401524211722
fad: pretty genius, i completely forgot about that diagonal approach
fad: for whatever reason, placing points equally spaced sqrt(2)px apart on the diagonal like that (i.e., 1 point in each pixel) makes it so the lines drawn from them intersect all the pixels in the image exactly once without duplicates
fad: i'm guessing that's what makes it look good, even if you don't space them out exactly sqrt(2) distance apart
fad: i'm guessing now that you found the diagonal thing it's not too hard to create this mapping?
Alexander: oh cool didn't realize it also worsk for non-squares
Alexander: there are multiple ways to create such a mapping
Alexander: and they seem to have pretty wild impact on the end result that i can't explain
Alexander: also we need somethign that works for 3d
Alexander: because none of this does
fad: in your mapping, do you have different points for going forwards/backwards along a given line?
fad: is the ray from A to B different than the ray from B to A?
Alexander: yes they have to be different
Alexander: because they have different occlusion
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Been thinking some more about the restrictions on penumbra reprojection
AdrianM: Above you can see a basic example of a penumbra
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: And here you can see how it can be reprojected to a different plane
AdrianM: As mentioned earlier, each penumbra actually have 3 different ways to be described geometrically with two half planes, so if we want to use the same type of definition for both split penumbras then the second one becomes this
AdrianM: The problem comes if we try to reproject to a plane closer than the original definition, say this one:
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: You can see that the triangle doesn't fit
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Even making it into a thin slice and moving it up and down it doesn't fit
Alexander: ngl i have lost what you're trying to show or achieve a while ago
AdrianM: \*sigh\*
AdrianM: I shall continue regardless
AdrianM: It turns out there is a way to do reprojection with subtraction though.
AdrianM: In this case subtracting the right from the left gives us the triangle we want but with a different defining plane.
AdrianM: Okay. Let's see if I can figure out how to explain...
Yaazarai: Your diagrams are starting to make as much sense as mine.
AdrianM: Okay, so in linespace we have some area that we care about
AdrianM: Honestly for now I don't even care what that area is
AdrianM: Could be any shape
AdrianM: The point is we have some area in linespace which we want to simulate the lighting within
AdrianM: In order to do this we want to be able to divide and conquer. So we need a way to recursively split that area into smaller sub areas.
AdrianM: You might think "okay, so what's the problem? Just split it up like you would a quadtree"
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Unfortunately this doesn't give us a way to add shadows to it (at least not one I can see)
AdrianM: I already explained what an quadtree does in linespace, but I'll explain again
AdrianM: The highest level is equivalent to two connected planes in real space
AdrianM: (quick illustration incase that isn't clear what I mean)
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Now when I split it it's equivalent to splitting the two planes in half and then connecting all the segments
Alexander: the only way is to subdivide in realspace
AdrianM: What do you mean?
Alexander: in order to introduce occlusion, we need to subdivide realspace, not the linespace
Alexander: because we need to have multiple representations for the same line, but at different hit distances
AdrianM: Correct!
AdrianM: But when we divide up real space that is also going to create splits in our linespace
AdrianM: So we are splitting up both spaces
AdrianM: We have an infinite number of lines, and we want to create groupings for them.
Alexander: some subdivisions of realspace don't really subdivide the line space
AdrianM: And we want those groupings to have geometric definitions that can map to different cascades in physical space
Alexander: or rather they produce linespace chunks that overlap
AdrianM: I'm thinking about if it is possible to do it losslessly
Alexander: [image]
AdrianM: For that to be possible there should be a 1-to-1 mapping between realspace and linespace
Alexander: i don't think it even should be a goal, because we do want to have multiple representations for the same line, but that only store occlusion within one realspace tile or the other realspace tile, so that we can merge them in a well defined order
AdrianM: Sure we can
AdrianM: If we are doing the lighting in one direction (say a quadrant) and the same ray exists in two different groupings which corrispond to two different planes then we can merge them in the order of the direction
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Here the red and blue line are the same
AdrianM: But they are defined using different planes
AdrianM: So if we want to merge/simulate the shadows from left to right then we can merge them by applying blue over top of red
AdrianM: Which is why I've been thinking so much about defining the same group of rays using different planes
AdrianM: If we can reproject the same group of lines to be defined using any arbitrary planes then we can do lossless HRC
Alexander: i've also been doing that in my quadtree implementation: i use realspace quadtree cells to produce linespace bases
fad: here's what i came up with for the diagonal line thing: https://www.desmos.com/geometry/ewgzxps1zy

it's a continuous mapping between realspace lines passing through the unit square (red) and linespace points in `[0,1] × [-π,π]` (blue). linespace is cylindrical since it wraps around from `y = -π` back to `y = π`

enable the first folder to drag a realspace line and see what linespace point it maps to
enable the second folder to drag a linespace point and see what realspace line it maps too

in this version there's a bit of nonlinearity due to the use of trigonometry but you could replace that with some piecewise linear version of tan/atan2 and it'd become piecewise linear again if that's important
AdrianM: Exactly, we are talking about shifting basis functions
Alexander: but you can already do that: you for any two lines you can enumerate all lines within a bundle. so you can just iterate over every line in a bundle in one basis and find which bundle it belongs to in the other basis
AdrianM: Well but that mixes the data together
AdrianM: It isn't 1-to-1
AdrianM: It isn't reversible
AdrianM: It isn't lossless
AdrianM: But I'm curious if there's a clever way we can set up our bundles to fix that
Alexander: but it has to be, because a lower cascade tiling of realspace will always have fewer lines than a realspace tiling of higer cascade
Alexander: lower cascades just have fewer lines
Alexander: maybe that's a problem that needs to be fixed, i'm not sure
Alexander: but it's a fact
AdrianM: I don't quite follow. I see it like this
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: If we start out with the pink to define our basis, and now want to shift to the red and blue for our  definition then we lose data
AdrianM: Every ray from pink can be bundled into either red or blue
AdrianM: But then once they are in red or blue we can't reconstruct pink anymore
Alexander: imagine a quadtree in realspace. say, c0 has 4 blocks, each block has 2x2 lines
Alexander: both have 16 lines in total
Alexander: but half of lines on the left are actually the same line represented at different hit distances
Alexander: so the number of unique lines actually increases 2x if you go from the left one to the right one
Alexander: and that's fine, i think it has to increase
Alexander: because you can't capture occlusion otherwise
AdrianM: Well yeah, if it is the same exact line then it should go in the same bundle always
AdrianM: Has to be grouped with itself
AdrianM: And I agree that there has to be some redundancy to capture shadows
AdrianM: That's a useful observation
Alexander: i think with this quadtree-based approach there are no fundamental questions
Alexander: it should work
Alexander: there are no questions unanswered
Alexander: it's just unclear exactly which basis to pick and how exactly to merge them fast
Alexander: and how to minimize the error in the end
AdrianM: You are talking about connecting all the edges of the quadtree with lines. Not dealing with the area of the quadtree.
Alexander: area of the quadtree is equal to the number of lines it can represent
AdrianM: Which I also think will work. I expect the error will be similar to HRC but with different artifacts
Alexander: yes but apparently the error is wildly different depending on the basis
Alexander: and also it has some artifacts that i don't know where they're coming from
AdrianM: I think I see where we diverged
AdrianM: You are defining some space of all lines and then thinking about discretizing those lines and then using those for your basis to do HRC
Alexander: yes, there's many ways to do that
AdrianM: I'm thinking about how to discretize the physical areas in linespace
Alexander: i'm not sure how doing that would result in a method that supports occlusion
AdrianM: .
Alexander: if anything it should be some some sort of a mipping scheme for the linespace. where multiple tiles in linespace merge together to be represented with one value or something
Alexander: yes but this requires storing every line more than once, which you can't do if you do a lossless tiling on top of it
AdrianM: As long as the physical shapes we are using to split up the linespace can be defined between two planes then we can run HRC on it.
AdrianM: I'm not even thinking about storing lines
AdrianM: There are no lines. Only groupings of the linespace made up of infinite lines
AdrianM: Splitting infinity into smaller groups of infinity
Alexander: that's fine
Alexander: any shape in the linespace corresponds to a bundle of lines in the realspace
AdrianM: Yes, but if they can't be defined geometrically in real space then that by itself isn't that useful
Alexander: so we plan to store one value for every shape like that, assuming all lines in that shape have the same radiance
Alexander: yes every bundle has to be in some way spatially localized in the realspace in order for merging to work
AdrianM: Yup
Alexander: i'm not quite sure what the actual requirement is, but it needs to be in some sense compact. like, all lines in a bundle should be intersecting as tight realspace area as possible or something of that sort
AdrianM: All the lines passing through a point in real space are a line in linespace
AdrianM: So "spatially localized" corrisponds to a line in linespace
Alexander: hmm.. what if for any shape in linespace there is a corresponding smallest shape in the realspace that all those lines intersect?
Alexander: can we find such a mapping?
Alexander: and then the task becomes to create a tiling that works in both spaces at the same time
AdrianM: Now you are seeing the vision
AdrianM: I think that this will end up being possible, but I suspect that each time we subdivide the space the data required to hold it losslessly will double or something
AdrianM: My worry is that it won't actually end up giving us a solution which is faster than brute force ray tracing
Alexander: well did we even ever have that mapping from a tile in linespace to a tile in realspace such that every line intersects that realspace tile?
Alexander: is it always a convex shape around the two edges that produce the bundle?
Alexander: because for bundles that are created from two edges in realspace it is definitely just that: a quad made of those two edges
Alexander: but can we generalize it past bundles made of two uniformly sampled realspace edges?
AdrianM: I am curious about the same thing
AdrianM: If there are other shapes/patterns that we could create in linespace which might be useful
AdrianM: I have no idea how to approach that one though
AdrianM: right now I'm working with half bundles (penumbra) which are triangles in linespace which can be defined in 3 different ways using two two planes
AdrianM: Any polygon can be described with triangles so this feels pretty fundamental.
AdrianM: But there could be other weirder methods out there.
Alexander: there might be a realspace shape that a half bundle corresponds to
Alexander: such that every line in that bundle crosses that shape
Alexander: or does it mean that both full bundle and half bundle correspond to the same trapezoid?
Alexander: if so, lame
AdrianM: Yes and no
AdrianM: It corrisponds to 3 different trapezoids
Alexander: maybe their union means something
Alexander: and full bundle corresponds to one trapezoid?
Alexander: so bundles that have fewer lines correspond to a larger shape?
AdrianM: A full bundle is one rhombus
AdrianM: And you can cut that in half to get a triangle
Alexander: in realspace a full bundle is one trapezoid
AdrianM: But since a triangle is 3 sides that means there are 3 rhombuses that could have been cut in half to make the triangle
Alexander: right, sure
Alexander: so you can definitely re-tile one tiling into another tiling
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: [image]
Alexander: stuff like this
Alexander: [image]
Alexander: you can regroup adjacent triangles into tiles in different ways
AdrianM: That's the vision
Alexander: but what does it give us i'm not sure
AdrianM: It gives us options
AdrianM: (sorry, posted the same one twice, here's the corrected version)
Alexander: i think the truth lies in how to find the most information we can lose that doesn't matter to us, to use that all for occlusion, not how to not lose any information
AdrianM: I'd like to see how to avoid losing any information
AdrianM: What does a lossless solution look like
AdrianM: And then we can decide where to add the loss
Alexander: well just make 2 different tilings by splitting rhombuses in 2 different ways, see what that looks like in realspace
AdrianM: That's just going to corrispond to two different projections
AdrianM: Which is what I've been thinking about so much
Alexander: doesn't have to be rhombuses btw. can also try this:
Alexander: i just am curious to see what different linespace tilings look like in reaslapce
AdrianM: I don't see how that  gives us a useful geometric definition
Alexander: well i think it's a bit of a theme here
Alexander: ok well, does that even look regular in realspace or not?
Alexander: i think the answer might be a no
Alexander: do we want to find a regular linespace tiling that is also regular in realspace?
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Squishing the rhombus is the same as projecting between one different plane
AdrianM: If you change the x position of both planes you can do rotations
AdrianM: Well more of a skew anyways
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Actually, exactly a skew, moving the planes together in +-x is a y-skew of the linespace
Alexander: I think if we try to actually implement any of these, we'd discover that the problems that we encounter might be different from the kinds of problems that we expect
Alexander: says me after fighting discretization issues for the past couple days
Alexander: all sorts of them too
AdrianM: First I need to see a clear path to an implementation
AdrianM: Which with the approach I'm thinking about right now requires reprojection
AdrianM: And I still don't full understand the options I have for reprojection, though maybe what I have right now is good enough
Decetive: this is all very interesting, too bad im far too stupid to help at all:thonk:
AdrianM: Oh don't worry, there's a chance this all ends up in a big dead end
AdrianM: That's always the risk when exploring new ground
sweg: does this get us closer to 3d hrc or not :KEKW:
sweg: thats all i care about
Alexander: https://discord.com/channels/1277053173764460625/1304556173671927878/1416331830574977024 3d hrc is yesterday's news
Alexander: today's news is sparse 3d hrc
AdrianM: We're never going to get anything nearly as clean as what we can get with 2D HRC in 3D which still runs in real time
AdrianM: 3D just has too much data
AdrianM: We have to give something up somewhere. So it's about finding where we can make those cuts
AdrianM: At least for online rendering
Cody Bennett: Does giving up my sanity count?
Cody Bennett: I am halfway there with SSRC.
Cody Bennett: I did not read up on this channel, but does linespace open up sparse HRC in 3D or how did that come to be?
AdrianM: Linespace is just a general tool for thinking about any kind of ray tracing problem
Yaazarai: Can we get a tl;dr explanation of the point of linespace.
Yaazarai: For pinned comments.
AdrianM: You have an infinite line, in linespace that line is a point
AdrianM: To be more specific, the y coordinate of that point is the y-intercept and the x coordinate is the slope
AdrianM: If instead you use distance to the origin and angle then you get radon space which is used by radon transforms and hough transforms.
AdrianM: But the lines in radon space aren't straight which makes them harder to work with/reason about.
AdrianM: For convenience, this is the point where we figured out that linespace wasn't something we invented.
AdrianM: Huh, that was only a week ago? Crazy.
Alexander: these diagrams without axes and the origin are not understandable by people who are not in the loop
AdrianM: [image]
Alexander: yeah that's probably more understandable but connecting slope to the x-position is still going to be impossible for people
Alexander: this is how we encode lines in line space: one line in realspace (black) corresponds to one point in linespace (red). coordinates of that point is (x, y)
AdrianM: Ah there you go, I was just going to show two graphs with the point shifted right so you could swap back and forth
AdrianM: Diagram is hopefully more clear
Yaazarai: Yeah that makes perfect sense.
Alexander: hmm.. what if we did it like this?
Fluxxi: does that mean that perfectly vertical lines cannot be represented?
Alexander: this way x of the line is x of the point, y of the line is y of the point
Alexander: correct, with this way of encoding lines you can't. but we already have like 3 million other ways to represent any line (including vertical ones) with 2 numbers, and we still don't know which one should be preferred
Alexander: @AdrianM i think you did something similar to this initially
Alexander: in your linespace exploration web thing
Fluxxi: thinking about it, couldn't you store the slope as an angle relative to the x axis which would allow for all possible directions? maybe this has already been thought of, idk
Alexander: that's one of the many ways we tried doing it
Fluxxi: makes sense
AdrianM: Isn't that just swapping the x and y axis? (maybe with a reflection)
Alexander: you can see some of them here https://entropylost.github.io/hrcviz/
Alexander: not exactly, because x becomes the x-intercept instead of y-intercept
Alexander: at least moving the line horizontally becomes moving the linespace point horizontally and sloping it up becomes moving the linespace point up
AdrianM: Rotate by 90 degrees and then y intercept becomes x intercept
Alexander: yeah sure it's just a rotation-mirroring-translation thing
Alexander: just if you look at a rotated, mirrored and translated something, it's harder to understand what you're looking at
AdrianM: You can shift the space around any way which is most convenient
AdrianM: The properties are the exact same
Alexander: yes but i'm trying to find the most understandable way to show it to people who're out of the loop
AdrianM: I find y intercept convinient to think about. Then a point at x=0 in linespace is a horizontal line at the same y value
Alexander: i guess if we stored 1/intercept then this could work
Alexander: it's just intercept is proportional to y, so we store it on the y axis. cool. but slope is also proportional to y, but we store it on the x-axis. that's why i think it might be easier to understand if we store either (x-intercept, y-slope) or (x-slope, y-intercept)
AdrianM: So then a vertical line is x=0 and a horizontal line is x=infinity
AdrianM: Which is the opposite of what we have been using
Alexander: both of them are in some sense the opposite
Alexander: but at least axes align somewhat
AdrianM: I'd have to draw all my merge diagrams vertically
Alexander: not saying we should do it, just if we plan to explain it to people, something like this might be more approachable
Alexander: mine already ended up vertical
Alexander: because i put probes on the x-axis for some reason
AdrianM: Im not too concerned with what conventions people want to use
AdrianM: The rabbit hole is just as deep either way
Alexander: me neither, but they'll keep asking
AdrianM: I'd pin this, and we can pin any additional explanation required if people ask questions
Alexander: actually, this is interesting. i've been using (x-intercept, x-slope) in my impl. maybe i should try (x-slope, y-intercept). it actually does change the bundle shape
Alexander: Pinned a message.
AdrianM: Why not both?
AdrianM: y intercept x intercept
Alexander: https://tenor.com/view/ohh-oh-damn-oh-daymn-daym-damn-gif-2649905700736798302
Alexander: good fucking question
Alexander: wait (-1..1, -1..1) is the space of all possible lines, right?
Alexander: with x-intercept y-intercept
Alexander: this is the same as my diagonals thing, right, but rotated 45 degrees
AdrianM: yup
Alexander: wait no it can only represent all lines in a rhombus
Alexander: 45 degrees rotated
Alexander: but instead of encoding position on a diagonal + angle i can encode 2 positions on 2 diagonals maybe?
AdrianM: Well the x y intercepts have to be between +- infinity
AdrianM: Hmmmmmm actually that depends
Alexander: nah that's no good i want a compact representation that maps all lines in a realspace square to a square in linespace
AdrianM: If you have a limited area of space you care about then... maybe?
AdrianM: Ah no, a horizontal line still goes out to infinity on the x intercept
AdrianM: Same for a vertical line
Alexander: wdym no? for x-intercept y-intercept horizontal lines are (0, 1) and (1, 0)
AdrianM: You are rotating the axis by 45 degrees?
Alexander: [image]
Alexander: y-intercept is 0, x-intercept is 1
AdrianM: What about a horizontal line at y=0.5 ?
Alexander: this encodes lines only in a rhombus
Alexander: 45 degrees rotated
Alexander: so either use diagonal intercepts to encode lines in axis-aligned square, or use cardinal axis intercepts to encode lines in a 45 degree rotated diamond
Alexander: why does it have to be so difficult
AdrianM: hmmmm
AdrianM: Interesting, I wonder if this gives us a nice way to solve the diagonals
AdrianM: Oh well, one thing at a time
fad: ax+by=1 with linespace point (a,b) is another representation of lines, this one can't represent lines passing through the origin
Alexander: i think i see something interesting about how we discretize HRC in linespace. you know guys how we can have a line that connects pixels (p1, p2) in linespace which represents a cN+1 probe. then we can have two lines (p3, p4) and (p5, p6) that represents say two probes of cN. we merge them if (p1, p2) can be accurately enough represented by connecting segments (p3, p4) and (p5, p6). but in reality there are many ways to rasterize a line, so they'll always end up not quite matching, and because of that there will be aliasing issues.

so I'm thinking that we can actually ***define line rasterization rules*** such that (p3, p4) + (p5, p6) _exactly_ line up with (p1, p2). how? well, instead of doing DDA or brezenham we can define every line bundle as two points of cN linespace and a distance range. here's an illustration
Alexander: so this is going back to the idea of having a global indexing scheme to avoid aliasing issues
Alexander: we can also define line rasterization rules in a very deterministic way: instead of doing dda, we can keep subdividing and rounding every line segment until we reach a single pixel. this way there's no floating point-like ambiguity happening and every line that goes through the same pair of pixels will always share a segment in its entirety
Alexander: also interesting to note that aliasing errors in linespace result in lines that don't focus exactly at the same point, which is not the same as realspace where it results in lines not being quite straight
Alexander: there is definitely something to this way of rasterizing a line where we divide it into two and round the endpoints of formed segments to pixel centers. there is something this will guarantee, but i'm not quite sure what
Alexander: yes i now think this is the "lossless" part that we were talking about, @AdrianM
Alexander: because two cN segments exactly form one cN+1 segment. the only "inexactness" here is not because merging is inexact, it's because we define lines to be not quite straight
Alexander: here is an illustration how this works visually. we can ***define*** line AB as lines AC and DB connected together. this process can be subdivided recursively until we reach 1x1 pixel line segments
Alexander: this way the process of figuring out if a given pixel belongs to a given line is actually non-trivial and requires log N computation, but that's fine. in other words, it can not be replaced with dda, line vs box check or anything of that sort. it can only be subdivided recursively.
Alexander: also nothing happens in line space in this approach. everything is realspace, just geometrically subdividing things
Alexander: i'm not quite sure what merging entails, but extensions should be "lossless", if we define "lossless" as "the result of doing extensions exactly matches the result of casting them analytically", we just define what a ray is by what we can calculate via extensions
Alexander: there is also a dual process to doing extensions which should result in merging, but I have not quite figured out how that works yet, but it has to use exactly the same math
Alexander: i tried to find a solution how to do linespace accurately and accidentally found one that does not invole the linespace at all
Alexander: hmmm.... i wonder. should we express this entire algo in integers?
Alexander: subdividing lines recursively can be done in just integers
Alexander: @fad then the problem that we need to solve becomes the same line basis problem, but discrete: in a pixelated box of size NxN (N is a power of 2), how do we define NxN (maybe 2Nx2N?) unique lines? ideally we should define them in a way such that after rasterizing all those lines they add up to exactly the same fluence at every pixel
Alexander: note that we can define both the way we enumerate lines and also the way we rasterize them, the only requirement is that after rasterizing all lines in a box they should add up to the same fluence and they should look as straight as we can, but that's more of a bonus rather than a hard requirement
Alexander: sounds like every line needs to cover exactly N pixels is one of the must-have requirements, interesting
Alexander: i guess they don't have to cover every pixel the same number of times, but then we need to come up with weights such that if we overlap all lines with those weights then they do add up
fad: do you mean cN-1, not cN+1?
Alexander: yeah you're right
fad: you should edit your message to correct that, otherwise it becomes pretty confusing to follow until the reader realises the typo
Alexander: i did already
Alexander: wait what
Alexander: ok i edited the other one too
Alexander: how did i make the same mistake twice? (rhetorical question)
Alexander: actually the reason why i made that typo is because the first post i was writing about the linespace: there cN+1 lines are shorter and I was thinking about combining them into a longer realspace line. but in realspace it's the other way round, interestingly. and only after finishing the second post I realized that it can be run entirely in the realspace
Alexander: so whether you use it to create cN+1 by combining two cN segments in realspace or you combine two cN+1 segments into one cN segment in linespace: it's actually unclear which one would produce artifacts that are more desireable
Alexander: this means that merging can be thought of as extensions in line space. so merging and extensions are completely equivalent processes, just one works in realspace the other works in linespace
fad: did you see https://discord.com/channels/1277053173764460625/1304556173671927878/1471762143341842630
fad: they define line rasterization recursively in a similar way
Alexander: nope didnt read
Alexander: i have a feeling nobody would have the same requirement as we do though
Alexander: so that every pixel is covered by the same number of lines
Alexander: checked the paper
Alexander: yeah it's very similar to what i thought
Alexander: they're doing one pass that covers 45 degrees
Alexander: also they count diagonals and horizontals twice
Alexander: resulting in nasty double counting factors
Alexander: i want to see if there's a way to formulate it in a 2d way
Alexander: instead of connecting 1d points on lines, maybe we can connect 2d points on a box
Alexander: they're definitely doing a lot of similar things to what i just reinvented though
Alexander: it's a good sign means it's not stupid
Alexander: especially the recursive discretization part, i'm not convinced that it's the only way to do it correctly
Alexander: anything that involves actual lines or ray vs aabb tests is bound to fail due to nasty discretization artifacts
Alexander: they are also doing it between two "long" planes. we have to do it with boxes not planes in order to make sparse rc work and to make occlusion work too. those two properties are connected
Alexander: the implicit choice that they made is that they assume lines connect pixel centers. then it gets really nasty with all the extra members, double counted diagonals and such. but it's possible to consider lines that connect pixel edges. then there is no duplication
Alexander: maybe the move is to just store 4N^2 lines and just ignore some of them during summation?
Alexander: anyway i think it's worth trying both the pixel-centered version and edge-centered version
Alexander: not sure if vertex-centered version makes any sense
fad: yet somehow they're able to make inverting work. that proves there are ways to deal with the double counting and still get a correct result, which at least gives some hope that there are solutions
Alexander: yes it's not an algorithmic problem
Alexander: it's "it just looks ugly" problem
Alexander: where did you find that paper btw?
fad: i was googling "discrete radon transform" and "inverse discrete radon transform"
Alexander: i feel like there has to be a sane framework here how to manage all of this gracefully
Alexander: i'm not seeing it right now
Alexander: but the direction is definitely very self-consistent and imo makes sense
Alexander: just like actually implementing functions like "split line in a box into its child boxes"
Alexander: it needs to be very precise and deliberate with rounding, negative number handling etc
Alexander: looks like the only way to implement it is in rational maths. everything is a fraction of 2 integers
Alexander: line vs box intersections etc
Alexander: same as floating points, but a/b > c/d becomes ad > cb
Alexander: why do you even need ray vs aabb intersection? when there's a line in a box and you subdivide the box into 4 parts, how does the line subdivide?
Alexander: this is what a hierarchically rasterized line looks like
Alexander: this is definitely not exactly straight
Alexander: and it gives me hope seeing how different it is from dda or raycasting
Alexander: man.. negative integer division strikes again
Alexander: this is so annoying
fad: just define floor_div(x,y) function and use that instead of thinking about negative integer division
Alexander: yeah i had to
Alexander: but even that, how do i actually properly write it? i produced this, but it's pretty ugly ngl:
```cpp
  int RoundDiv(int a, int b)
  {
    int d = b * 100000;
    return (a + (b - 1) / 2 + d) / b - d / b;
  }
```
:KEKW:
fad: idk just copy whatever stack overflow says lol
fad: what does line from (0,0) to (32,1) look like
fad: aka almost but not quite horizontal line
Alexander: will have a bend in the center
Alexander: also tried (32, -1), (-32, 1) and (-32, -1)
Alexander: seem to all have the bend in the center
Alexander: but (1, 32) currently doesn't work :KEKW:
Alexander: truly this requires writing these functions once and never touching them ever again
Alexander: maybe a unit test of some sort
fad: why does it prefer bending down from the true line?
Alexander: it was a floor instead of round
fad: what does it look like with round and what does it look like with ceil?
Alexander: (32, 14) line
Alexander: lower round, ceil, floor, upper round
Alexander: upper round as in 5/2 = 3, lower round 5/2 = 2
Alexander: want to have a way to take images into the clipboard directly
Alexander: i wonder if webgl allows that
fad: right click canvas and copy image?
Alexander: doesn't have that. but conveniently has this:
Alexander: i guess this sort of works
fad: does it work for you on shadertoy?
Alexander: [image]
Alexander: can summarize the page though
fad: "save image as" i guess
Cody Bennett: <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/27863617/is-it-possible-to-copy-a-canvas-image-to-the-clipboard>
fad: i just checked, on chrome i get the option to both copy or save, while firefox only lets me save
Cody Bennett: :briannaPls:
fad: but like, it's a built in feature for canvases. you shouldn't have to implement this yourself
fad: i just tried on one of my own web pages that uses webgl to draw on a canvas and it lets me right click > copy/save image there as well and i didn't manually implement it
Alexander: the "take screenshot" thing in firefox allows you to select either the whole page or one div
Alexander: so i guess that sort of works
fad: here are aligned versions :KEKW:
fad: how come only the left third of the upper/lower round versions differ while the rest is identical?
Alexander: i guess the rest didn't struggle rounding anything?
Alexander: i mean it only matters if you actually hit the case where you divide an odd number by 2
Alexander: apparently, just splitting a line into 2 by a vertical line is not easy
Alexander: as in, into section that's to the left from x=2 and to the right
Alexander: because if a line is too vertical, then both segments still need to connect, there's like 69 different sign combinations and i'm bad at integer maths
Alexander: programming integer maths feels like speaking turkish: it's clearly a whole language of its own and i clearly have no idea how to use it
Alexander: progress with line (32, 26)
Alexander: this is actually rasterized with aabb's already, not with binary divisions
Alexander: so i can render bad lines now too. like vertical ones
Alexander: wow.. the code is pretty nasty. so i doubt it will be fully symmetric. like, i'm not sure my lines react correctly to being flipped vertically/horizontally/diagonally. i don't even know what it means to be correct in those cases
Alexander: I ended up writing a bunch of unit tests right in the shader, like this:
```cpp
  vec4 UnitTest()
  {
    vec4 color = vec4(0.0f);
    {
      LineSegments2 s = SplitLineX(ivec4(0, 0, 1, 1), 1);
      if(s.segment_points[0] != ivec4(0))
      {
        color += vec4(1.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f);
      }
      if(s.segment_points[1] != ivec4(1))
      {
        color += vec4(1.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f);
      }
    }
    {
      LineSegments2 s = SplitLineX(ivec4(0, 1, 1, 0), 1);
      if(s.segment_points[0] != ivec4(0, 1, 0, 1))
      {
        color += vec4(0.0f, 0.0f, 1.0f, 0.0f);
      }
      if(s.segment_points[1] != ivec4(1, 0, 1, 0))
      {
        color += vec4(0.0f, 0.0f, 1.0f, 0.0f);
      }
    }
    ...
  return color;
}
```
and that actually helped a lot
Alexander: because every change i made broke something
Alexander: so just a bunch of simple tests for all building blocks helped me find regressions fast
Alexander: lesson learnt, i should cover all code that can be covered (horizontal/vertical/diagonal lines, lines split in half, etc) with tests right in the shader, because that's something integer math is actually really well suited for
Alexander: "white furnace"
Alexander: "point source" :KEKW:
Alexander: alright, it is now technically working, i'll just need to figure out all the bugs
Alexander: this is just connecting left wall to the right wall. clearly something is less uniform than it should be
Alexander: some of the rays. seems fine?
Alexander: ahh nice, found the bug. parallel rays are not really parallel. should be fixable
AdrianM: This feels a little similar to how I was looking at doing extensions before
AdrianM: Very interesting
AdrianM: Actually I'm not sure that holds true for occlusions
Alexander: hmm... i realized that i'm on much harder mode than radon transform, because i'm splitting my lines by boxes, not by parallel planes, so making sure lines are always identical regardless of translation is going to be harder
Alexander: yeah so just a clarification what the current state is and what i'm trying to get. this new way of rasterizing lines produces lines that are not quite straight, and those lines don't yet produce a uniform enough basis yet, so it looks worse than the alternatives so far. however, this basis is lossless, which means i can do extensions O(N^2 log N) time and achieve exactly the same look as I can with doing it bruteforce (like I currently do), it is spatially local which allows me to do occlusion, it's defined by blocks rather than lines, which allows me to do sparse RC with it and it also allows exact merging, which means merging it produces the same exact result as bruteforce gathering. but there's a lot of ways i could tweak it to make it look better, especially if i knew what i was doing (which i don't)
Alexander: found the simplest problematic case of two lines that are meant to be parallel that don't align
Alexander: hmm... is there a way to implement sparse with planes, rather than blocks? because blocks absolutely make everything 10x more complicated
AdrianM: I've been thinking about planes this entire time
Alexander: well it's much easier to think of planes, but it's not going to help 3d
AdrianM: In your case you get to choose which lines get indexed to which planes so I don't see why planes would be an issue
AdrianM: You mean sparse
Alexander: 3d has to be sparse
AdrianM: Also who said we can't do sparse RC with planes?
Alexander: i don't see how to keep planes sparse when we go to higher cascades
AdrianM: It'd be weird and probably janky. But the surface of our planes could be quadtrees or somethin'
Alexander: the problem is that dense cells of that quadtree will diverge in a cone
Alexander: and become wider
AdrianM: I don't see how that's a problem
Alexander: if any ray is occupied in a wider cone, then whole cone becomes occupied
Alexander: so it reduces sparsity fast
Alexander: what i like about block-based is that it uses the same exact sparse block structure we already tried with sparse vanilla
Alexander: we know that that works
AdrianM: Really there's no restrictions on how we store data onto those planes.
AdrianM: We've been using rays but that might not be our only option
AdrianM: In any case I haven't thought much about that yet
AdrianM: I haven't entirely ruled out planes for sparse RC though
Alexander: the rasterization problem that i have is 100% because of boxes and i'm not sure if it's possible to fix
Alexander: it's because rays are not guaranteed to preserve their shape if you translate them perpendicularly to the plane that cuts them
Alexander: they only preserve it if you translate them in that plane
AdrianM: Can you get it to work with planes? I'm curious how that works
Alexander: that would work but that'd be a defeat for me
AdrianM: "work" as in no artifacts?
Alexander: yeah it would produce 100% uniform fluence
Alexander: for white furnace
AdrianM: Great, what about point lights and shadows?
Alexander: shadows should work fine
Alexander: point lights can't predict yet
Alexander: i think i can make it work, but it's a bit annoying. essentially all lines needs to be indexed by their starting position on the opposite sides, even if those positions are outside of the box
AdrianM: I'm very curious to see this work
AdrianM: Even if it is working with planes
Alexander: me too, but i'm not going to bring myself down to test, because testing on planes is not not a trivial change, and if i can't make it work on boxes then i'm not interested in it
AdrianM: If I understand correctly you basically want to define some fininte number the rays for entire scene which are defined with a line drawing function so that adding them all together produces a completely uniform covering
AdrianM: AKA each pixel gets hit by exactly the same number (or total weight) of rays
Alexander: the uniform covering thing is something i realized after trying it yes
Alexander: i feel like this has to be a requirement
Alexander: which is something we never really enforced
AdrianM: You've probably already figured this out, but if you can for any angle uniformly cover the plane then you can do it for all angles
Alexander: ofc
Alexander: this is what will guarantee white furnace test, i'm sure of it
Alexander: but idk how to define yet what makes point lights look good
Alexander: because that's the harder question
AdrianM: And if I am understanding, the issue you are having is how to take those line definitions and define them with smaller cascades/boxes?
AdrianM: Taking the same line and cutting it to be defined on a smaller cascade
Alexander: well currently i'm realizing that the way i've been defining lines (by their 2 points on the box perimeter) is not invariant to translation
AdrianM: How is it not?
Alexander: so lines change shapes if you translate them vertically
AdrianM: Oh, you mean if you try to redefine it using a new parimeter of a smaller box?
Alexander: yes i currently use perimeter points
Alexander: and looks like that's a mistake
AdrianM: Question, doesn't that mean that the smallest cascade will have a lot of redundancy? A 1 pixel box intercepts with a lot of rays
Alexander: so yes looks like what's important is to use line indexing scheme that we use for planes, but that indexing scheme can be used inside boxes
AdrianM: Or are you merging rays which are similar angles as you merge down?
Alexander: every NxN box currently has 2Nx2N rays in my implementation. which means 1x1 box will have 16 rays, I didn't bother removing redundant rays
Alexander: there is no merging of similar rays, everything is exact
Alexander: you just construct longer lines from shorter lines
Alexander: and you can store line segments of all possible lengths, you have enough memory for that in 2d
Alexander: the only price you pay is the way you discretize lines which is not exactly geometrically straight
AdrianM: "NxN box currently has 2Nx2N rays" how do you get 16 from that?
Alexander: sorry it's 4Nx4N
AdrianM: Lol, okay
AdrianM: Got you
AdrianM: And that's just an arbitrary constant you can adjust right?
Alexander: the non-redundant way is something like `2N*N + 2(N-2)*2N + 2(N-2)*(N-2)` which has to be 1 for 1x1, but it's really stupid
Alexander: every time you see N-2 there it's actually `max(N-2, 0)`
Alexander: no, it's the number of rays you can define on a perimeter of a box of size NxN pixels
Alexander: without double counting corner rays etc, without counting rays that start and end on the same side, etc etc
Alexander: it's really quite annoying for small boxes, so i just over-allocate as if all those rays are unique and will figure it out later
AdrianM: For a 1x1 box I count 12
Alexander: for 1x1 box it should be 1
AdrianM: [image]
Alexander: no rays don't start on edges in this implementation
Alexander: they start at pixel centers
Alexander: at least that's what the discrete radon transform paper does
Alexander: i have a mild suspicion it's sub optimal
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Now I count 8
Alexander: i use inner perimeter points
Alexander: so for a 1x1 box all perimeter points are 1 point, so the only ray is that starts at that point and ends at that same point
Alexander: i think this makes more sense though
Alexander: btw another takeaway is that shader-based rational maths thing is the only way to make all of this exact.
```cpp
  ivec2 MinRatio(ivec2 r0, ivec2 r1)
  {
    //r0.x / r0.y < r1.x / r1.y ? r0 : r1
    ivec2 u0 = r0 * Sign(r0.y);
    ivec2 u1 = r1 * Sign(r0.y);
    return (u0.x * u1.y < u1.x * u0.y) ? r0 : r1;
  }
```
Alexander: here r0 is representing a fraction r0.x/r0.y etc
Alexander: and the function returns `min(r0.x/r0.y, r1.x/r1.y)`
Alexander: you can rewrite ray vs aabb test with these in integers
AdrianM: Does the definition of the line even mater?
Alexander: yes, unfortunately for aabb children
Alexander: but if i use plane indices then it shouldn't matter
AdrianM: We have some abstract global definition of all lines, and we can just index into that
Alexander: when you have a line in a parent box and you need to figure out if a given child receives a segment of that line, you have to do an integer aabb vs ray test
AdrianM: As long as I have a function that can take some index and give me a line definition it shouldn't matter where that definition is stored or comes from
Alexander: i think using plane indices in a box should really make these parts simpler
Alexander: but it would make it slightly more nebulous of what it even means "line with these coordinates belongs to this box", because it's no longer obvious if a given line is in a box or not
Alexander: i guess for lines under 45 degrees it is obvious
Alexander: so maybe we can just store them per axis
AdrianM: Why not a compound index that encodes two points on a circle around the entire scene? We already know that's uniform
Alexander: ok well, simple question then. how many plane-indexed lines are there in a box?
Alexander: that is uniform in the continuous limit
Alexander: what we need here is uniform in discrete representation
Alexander: it's more like discrete line sweeping and less like integration
Alexander: basically as you said earlier, it needs to be uniform for any given line direction
Alexander: and circular/ring representation doesn't have the notion of "given direction"
Alexander: so there will be aliasing there for sure
Alexander: alright mate when are you going to start programming
Alexander: you've been theorycrafting a lot
AdrianM: No time right now unfortunately
AdrianM: And I don't have a clear image in my head of what the code needs to be
Alexander: i have a very clear image of what it has to do, but it's not quite clear how to implement it. like, on signed division level it needs to be very deliberate and precise
Alexander: you can't just throw more samples at it until it converges
Alexander: it's like watertight triangle rasterization. it's really nasty to implement, it's very easy to use once you have the boilerplate
Alexander: but the boilerplate functions are terrifying
Alexander: i'm also a bit sad that we went too much ahead of everybody else in this direction and others (RC, fad) have kind of lost track at some point and now it's going to be much harder for them to catch up and get them interested enough to implement stuff
Alexander: unless i present them something that "just works". but that'll take a lot of effort
RadianceCausality: I still think linespace is just not worth it
Alexander: i'm literally not using anything from linespace in this iteration
Alexander: it's only connecting lines in realspace
RadianceCausality: Uhhuh?
RadianceCausality: Wait is this just extensions
Alexander: all line diagrams you see above are realspace lines
Alexander: yes it's just extensions
RadianceCausality: Okaaaay?
Alexander: and i plan to use the exact same algo later in linespace to do merging
RadianceCausality: But anyways I don't think lines are worth it
RadianceCausality: Yeah that's the harder part
Alexander: i think it's literally the same exact code
Alexander: there is actually no difference
RadianceCausality: I mean making it not have artifacts
RadianceCausality: Also isn't merging still messy? Linespace doesn't describe intervals
Alexander: i don't even know what kind of artifacts it has, because getting to that point is non-trivial
Alexander: if merging happens for bundles that are contained within realspace boxes, it's fine
Alexander: same with extensions
Alexander: i'm now thinking that the only correct line indexing scheme for boxes that can work for 360 rays is to define a line as two numbers: first one is point index on the perimeter (for NxN box it's 4N or 4(N-1) points) and for each point there's 2N line raise values that define direction as offset to its index when it hits the opposite wall of the box in the counter clockwise direction
Alexander: [image]
Alexander: this way each diagonal gets counted once because j is [-(N-1)..N] inclusive, so diagonals avoid double counting and it should be clean around the entire circle
Alexander: i think attempting to index lines that end on 90 degree edges was a mistake
Alexander: we should only use indices on opposing sides, even for lines that end on 90 degree edges
Alexander: and just truncate those lines to the inside of the box
Alexander: this i mean
Alexander: kind of annoyingly though, also rays like this exist and we need to index them too:
Alexander: uh... i think everything goes back to diagonal being the only way to go in 2d. but diagonals don't work in 3d. i think i'll implement the simplest (although over-specified) way of encoding rays first (3Nx3N*4 total storage) and optimize it later
fad: have you ever managed to render an artefact-free 1px point light? like, forget about cascades and recursively and doing it optimally, but still using a discrete global indexing scheme and no cheating with continuous rays
Alexander: there were multiple variants that looked reasonably well
Alexander: the one with diagonal line indexing for example
Alexander: but it doesn't really matter, because changing the way you rasterize lines will affect that pretty dramatically, and there's no way to tell if the change is going to make it look better or worse
Alexander: so it's not about doing it with a global indexing scheme first and then trying to match that with a discrete transform. it's going to be just different
fad: sure but if you can’t get it to work with a global indexing scheme first then it’s basically impossible with an efficient logn approach
Alexander: as i said, it's not about matching that. you can have an indexing scheme that sucks with casting straight rays and that lines up really well if you subdivide them
Alexander: well i don't really know how realistic that is, but the goal isn't to get a perfect looking point light. in fact, i'd be more than happy to get an HRC point light from this. the goal is that this can be done in sparse 3d
Alexander: and there's a chance it might look better under some circumstances, but i really don't know
Alexander: i think i'll get to test a point light soon, at least for one quadrant
Alexander: implemented the parallel-line-block thing
Alexander: it should be numerically equivalent to discrete radon transform (i think?) although it uses blocks and not planes
Alexander: this is much simpler than my previous implementation, no rational math required
Alexander: ```cpp
  int IsPointOnBoxLine(ivec2 point, BoxLine box_line)
  {
    BoxLine curr_line = box_line;
    for(int i = 0; i < 10; i++)
    {
      if(!IsPointInAabb(point, curr_line.aabb_min, curr_line.aabb_size)) return -1;
      if(!IsBoxLineContained(curr_line)) return -2;
      if(curr_line.aabb_size.x <= 1 && curr_line.aabb_size.y <= 1) return i;
      uint child_idx = GetAabbChildIdx(point, curr_line.aabb_min, curr_line.aabb_size);
      curr_line = GetChildLine(curr_line, child_idx);
    }
    return -3;
  }
```
Alexander: this is the core (recursive line subdivision). i use different fail codes as negative numbers to detect various failure modes, that was also pretty useful for debugging cases that should not be possible
Alexander: white furnace works (in one 45 degree sector, but anyway)
Alexander: point light falloff
Alexander: yeah getting some very HRC-inspired patterns
Alexander: now i can try some indexing schemes that are very different from HRC. like the diagonal one
Alexander: curiously, the entire line layout geometry is contained within a single function that splits a line in parent aabb into its child aabb. there's nothing else about the shape of the lines exposed anywhere else
Alexander: i think for merging we'd also need the other way round: from a child line to get its parent line
Alexander: but that's literally it
Alexander: @AdrianM  i think i now understand the meaning of what it means to be lossless. if at any point you average any 2 intervals, you're losing information
AdrianM: tldr?
Alexander: that's an irreversible operation
Alexander: well you know how in hrc sometimes a cN interval sits between two other cN+1 intervals and we average them before merging
Alexander: i think that's an irreversible operation
AdrianM: I wonder if it strictly matters if it is reversible
Alexander: yeah me too
Alexander: because we do that all the time
Alexander: actually hmm... in line space that operation is actually concatenating line segments together. so it's not the same thing
Alexander: by concatenating them together we're not averaging anything
AdrianM: I think as long as the 'buckets' you are using to store the data lines up across cascades then it should be fine to average them
AdrianM: I think the artifacts come from where those buckets dont perfectly line up so you get some leaking
Alexander: i think maybe it means that during merging you can average 2 directions, because that's integration. but you can't interpolate two probe positions, that loses information
Alexander: because you know sometimes you extend cN ray and it lands between two cN+1 probes
Alexander: yeah i think that's avoidable
Alexander: and you're not really integrating probe positions, that's just straight up lost information
Alexander: yes when their positions don't line up you have to interpolate
AdrianM: I've been thinking about how we could reproject to make the buckets line up
Alexander: so what i'm doing is mostly equivalent to picking one of the two probes with specific rounding rules instead of averaging
Alexander: which is similar to what you've been doing
Alexander: with that checkerboard thing
Alexander: i wonder if the way i'm doing it results in a perfect falloff under some specific circumstances, like light position aligns with (-1, -1) or something of that sort
AdrianM: Thats frustrating that you are getting artifacts with this approach
Alexander: nah there's a lot of thing to try
Alexander: it's not defined in one specific way
Alexander: the cool thing is that it should result in the same exact image if i do it with extensions and if i add merging
Alexander: @fad i think i finally see how to enumerate line directions using the diagonal method
Alexander: so N samples covers the angle [0, 90)
Alexander: N+1 samples would cover [0, 90] inclusively
fad: did you see this?
fad: i guess now you’re dealing with the specifics of how to discretize it
Yaazarai: *ahem* the method I explained.
AdrianM: I really wish I understood
AdrianM: You've got the secrets to all the universe in you hands but I'm too dumb to understand
Yaazarai: TL;DR is you reproject the near plane by building extra cones to fill the gaps.
AdrianM: Have you got that working yet or is it still just a theory?
Alexander: yes i did the same with my continuous thing. but it's not obvious how to discretize it nicely
Alexander: apparently that second diagonal line can be also placed at a different distance. if you place it 2x farther, then N points discretize [0..45) interval. if you place it like on the image, then it's [0..90)
Yaazarai: I am working on it, yeah, but still theory.
Alexander: interesting, because the line splitting also works differently for them
Alexander: i think one insight from this is that you can in fact render extensions all the way using no interpolation, and always connecting rays 1 to 1. and this approach fundamentally can't produce a smooth falloff, because the falloff is defined as ***the number of lines*** that overlap at any given point in space, and since all lines have either 0 or 1 radiance, the falloff will also have to be discrete to the same degree
Alexander: and the only way that i can see to work around that is to not have N single-px lines intersecting at the source
Youssef Af: I have been trying to understand whats going on here and couldnt really get some points
Whats the advantage of this and how do we handle occlusions ?
Alexander: advantage of what
Alexander: there is a lot of things we discussed here and it's mostly just another way to view what we've always been doing
Alexander: but also each of us here is implementing something to further expand our understanding of how to inplement various gi schemes using this new interpretation
Alexander: i guess it's literally that, an interpretation
Alexander: i guess it's like we'be always been using newton's second law, and now we've discovered a lagrangian. technically, they're equivalent, but that equivalence is in itself profound and you can really do some things much easier with one interpretation and not the other
Youssef Af: Oooh thought we have a new algorithm
Alexander: there are multiple
Alexander: Guys, I found something. I think I see now how to construct a radiance encoding algorithm that will reproduce a pixel-perfect point light falloff, or in fact an arbitrary fluence field, including non-physical ones, and I will also tell you how to do it with any line basis, including discrete, anti-aliased, raycast, straight bent or otherwise. But I don't want to straight up tell you how to do it, because I think it's interesting to go through the journey of a couple questions that you can think about. You will probably think that it's stupid at first, then that it's obvious and then you'll realize that it can't be any way other than this.

So the first question I want you to think about is about radon transform or discrete linespace transform, but if you don't know what it is it's not a big deal just skip it, it's not terribly consequential but interesting to ponder about if you're in the loop. We have this thing that we call discrete radon transform or this discrete linespace transformation that we're trying to create/recreate/adapt/think about. We want to give it a point source in realspace, then we want to apply this transform that would give us its linespace representation (presumably it should convert that point source to radiance) and then we want to convert that representation losslessly back and obtain a.. point light falloff? Excuse me, but if it's lossless, shouldn't we expect to obtain a single point without a falloff back? Why do we expect to get a point light back from a point, how is that lossless in any sense?

Second question is, well how many probes and how many directions do we actually need to exactly represent a 2d pixel scene? What if we use too many? What if we use too few? Is there an optimal number? I'm sure you know the answer exactly already. If there is a block of NxN pixels, then you can encode it with NxN lines. And you can't use any fewer lines than that and there's no reason to use any more than that

<sorry discord cutoff>
Alexander: Next question I wondered is: we struggle to represent accurate point light falloff in HRC. Is it maybe because we're paying the cost of losing the falloff but getting sharp shadows? I'll straight up answer you: no. Why? Again, because there are NxM pixels in total between two planes and we use NxM intervals in total to encode them in HRC, I hope you see the theme at this point.

Well then the final and the most important mental experiment to imagine is this: imagine we have an ***arbitrary*** pixelized fluence field in a box and a bunch of lines indexed in some way that we define and rasterized in a way we define (with antialiasing, with dda, recursively, it doesn't even matter). Question: can we find radiance associated with every line, such that they reproduce that fluence field losslessly? You know the answer: there are NxN pixels and NxN lines and lines that overlap on top of each other are just additive, so we can always construct a system of NxN equations, one equation per pixel that says "all lines passing through this pixel add up to this pixel's fluence", and we can solve it, at least in theory, even if that solution would be very slow at first. But it would be a reference solution that would give us ***exact*** decomposition of an arbitrary fluence field that we can think of, including arbitrary point source falloff functions, located at arbitrary points in space.
Alexander: What does it give us? For any set of lines (left-right, intercept-slope, circles, it doesn't even matter) and any way of rasterizing them (dda, raycasting, antialised or not) it gives us the reference solution of what the brightness of each line has to be in order to add up to a falloff of a perfect point light. Note that this should result in some rays having ***negative*** radiance in order to produce nonphysical fluence, and a lonely point in space with no falloff is actually nonphysical and should result in exactly that.
Alexander: @AdrianM @RadianceCausality @fad  https://discord.com/channels/1277053173764460625/1472580758706065501/1475760136734900346
Alexander: I'll attach an image to make it a bit less boring to look at
Alexander: Natually, this gives us a trivial way to tell a good line basis vs a bad one. Or a good way of rasterizing lines vs a bad one. If a given line basis creates a (NxN) x (NxN) matrix that is non-invertible, then it's bad. If it is invertible, then it's workable. And the only thing that should make them different is how useful (or not) each basis is at representing occlusion. ***any*** good basis should be able to represent a perfect point light located at an arbitrary location in space with an arbitrary falloff, including those that are user-defined.
Alexander: Pinned a message.
Alexander: Then the goal of HRC isn't to do merging. It's not to do extensions. The goal of HRC is to solve that system faster than bruteforce. And I bet you there will be an up-down or push-pull solution that will have two distinct phases bottom-up and top-down which will involve adding lines of adjacent directions and then merging lines of the same direcitons, these phases will correspond to extensions and merging. But my point is, we should be able to get that solution in a dumb way first, and then try to find the same exact solution faster by constructing an RC-like algorithm, which should also be able to handle occlusion, if we do the push-pull correctly without violating the order of merging rays along the direction of their propagation.
fad: > Excuse me, but if it's lossless, shouldn't we expect to obtain a single point without a falloff back?
i always just thought of it as: you transform to linespace, apply some operation in linespace, and then transform back to realspace. and that in our implementations, the extensions/raytracing step did both the transform to linespace and that magical operation, and then the merging step just transformed back to realspace. i think if you had just a true transform from realspace to linespace that didn't also do that magical operation in the process, then a lot of the resulting pixels in the linespace image would be negative
Alexander: yup, the fact that we have no negative rays is a mistake. or at least the fact that we don't have a version that does produce negative rays
fad: at the very least, extension and merging are not inverses. (by "extensions" i don't specifically imply any algorithm for doing that like log n extensions, you could do raytracing or whatever, not important). in the discrete radon transform paper, they do extension and also present an inverse to extensions which is actually a true inverse. their true inverse is iterative though which doesn't bring me hope
Alexander: i think what it will give us is we will have the reference of what cN should look like after extensions, such that if we apply our existing way of merging it, it produces the exact solution that we want
Alexander: so we were always trying to find a merging scheme that produces the right falloff. but what we can do instead is to do the opposite: find what radiance field encoded and merged in our way produces the exact fluence that we want
Alexander: for any merging scheme
Alexander: but honestly i'm mostly interested in a merging-free version first. just explore a single cascade
fad: also this is a pretty sus image because obviously you are dropping some lines there to make the number of lines and number of pixels match
fad: in the DRT paper they even discuss how they end up with more  lines than pixels so it's not really a true inverse operation https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.0609228103#sec-4
Alexander: i didn't drop any lines. this literally means that 9 lines connecting left and right borders is what we need to encode an arbitrary fluence field.
fad: oh, you're only connecting left to right
Alexander: if this means that we can't encode radiance propagating in all directions, means we need to index lines differently, but there has to only be NxN lines
Alexander: it really might mean that we've been pretty dramatically oversampling (using too many lines)
fad: still weird though becuase those lines only cover a subset of directions and you've already used them all up, add any more lines and you'll start having more lines than pixels
Alexander: yes which means that the inversion is non-unique
Alexander: as in, multiple line arrangements will correspond to the same fluence
Alexander: i wonder if we can do 1-3 relaxation operations to reduce the number of artifacts and which might be equivalent to what they did with inversion
fad: have you tried brute forcing the reference solution for any scenes yet?
Alexander: not yet
Alexander: i just thought about this an hour ago
Alexander: i want to do this with relaxation, should be really easy to test
fad: what is "relaxation"?
Alexander: it's satisfying the system of equations one by one. in this case pixel by pixel
Alexander: every time ignoring all other equations/pixels
Alexander: and you can prove that this converges iteratively
fad: i'm sure you could formulate the problem and shove it into some python library lol
fad: unless you're doing this for the love of implementing it yourself
Alexander: it's just easier to do in shadertoy
Alexander: but it's pretty dumb, maybe there's a slightly less dumb way to do that
fad: the kind of thing LLMs would make quick prototyping of
Alexander: alright, i think there are a lot of things to try here. like what does it mean if we use just NxN rays in an NxN block instead of the typical HRC way that uses 4NxN? it should still give us the exact falloff but with less accurate occluison
Alexander: which is a failure mode we've never observed in HRC, our occlusion accuracy has always been directly tied with our falloff accuracy
Alexander: sure, if you like that kind of stuff. i prefer my programming nice and organic, unless i'm programming something i hate :KEKW:
fad: i'm not particularly fond of figuring out those python libraries which is why it's something i'd chuck at an LLM lol
Alexander: very simple iterative solver
Alexander: can't converge unfortunately
Alexander: uhhh it converges very slowly
Alexander: but i think if i had a better solver than this jacobi relaxation it would converge to the exact result
RadianceCausality: what is this?
RadianceCausality: the line space for a point?
Alexander: gave it some more time to converge and set the radiance function that it can actually represent with that basis
Alexander: no, i'm approximating a 1/r fluence falloff in line space
Alexander: with an iterative solver
Alexander: note how it does not quite converge to represent the black background
Alexander: but with an analytic solver it totally would
RadianceCausality: mm alright
RadianceCausality: so is this a line-space display or real-space?
Alexander: realspace
Alexander: realspace light approximation, but solved for lines
Alexander: same solver used for a custom falloff
Alexander: no falloff just the cone (converges very slowly)
Alexander: it's literally a matrix inversion
Alexander: from line space to realspace pixels to lines
Alexander: KxK system where K=NxN is the total number of lines/pixels
Alexander: so we can convert any fluence field (any desired falloff or any custom image really) into HRC encoded radiance field
Alexander: honestly i feel like now there are multiple ways we could make this work. for example, one way is to use a fixed line rasterization method and find a way to assign radiance to every line to get perfect point sources. this can be done with analytic matrix inversion (slowly) and we can find a way to do this in a block way similar to how HRC works.


a completely different way would be to instead find a way to rasterize lines such that they add up to point source with the desired falloff. i'm not quite sure, but if we assume that all lines are rasterized the same way, it should produce a linear system of the same size. this way we might find something that looks like a special way to anti-alias lines such that they rasterize into perfect point sources.
Alexander: but crucially each problem of this sort can be solved accurately to verify that it can work, and then the problem would be how to get to that answer faster
Alexander: @fad any luck with the python thing?
fad: nah i never tried
Alexander: sigh, it's alright there's a lot of things to try and i'll keep chipping away at them slowly
AdrianM: Oh man what did I come back to?
Alexander: oh look who woke up
AdrianM: I'm nearing the end of a year long project at work and we're working to hit the final dead line, got much less energy than usual.
Alexander: alright guys RC are not going anywhere
Alexander: you can get back to it if/when you feel like it
AdrianM: All good, this is what I do for fun
Alexander: but you might return to an arbitrary falloff problem solved already
AdrianM: Where did the negative radiance come from?
Alexander: the question is how did we get this far convincing ourselves we have some sort of lossless linear transformation that should not produce negative numbers
Alexander: some fluence configurations in empty space should not be possible to obtain with only positive radiance (non-physical ones)
AdrianM: To be fair the b-rays were negative
Alexander: nah there's way more of them
Alexander: like, there is no configuration of positive radiance rays that creates a single lit pixel in realspace
AdrianM: Doesn't that make sense? There's no way to effect only a single pixel without that light also creating falloff around it
Alexander: it only doesn't make sense from physics point of view if you assume there can be no negative radiance rays
Alexander: but if you do allow negative radiance rays, it should be possible
Alexander: because line transform is just a linear transformation from NxN pixels into NxN lines
Alexander: and linear transformations don't care about signs
AdrianM: Is there a reason why we want to consider cases like that which aren't physically possible? Is this related to representing shadows or is that separate?
Alexander: the only reason we want to consider that is because the fact we're not considering it means we're making a mistake
Alexander: it has to work for any arrangement of pixels and to convert them into an arrangement of lines
Alexander: positive or negative lines/pixels doesn't matter
AdrianM: Oh, I see. That's why a FFT is a valid solution to lighting without occlusion. Is that right?
AdrianM: Hmmmmm
Alexander: btw fft perfectly supports negative numbers and produces negative harmonics all the time
AdrianM: So we want different kind of transform like an FFT that gives us a way to also calculate shadows - am I following?
Alexander: i think shadows we already know how to solve. just do line transforms per block. what we don't know is how to do line transform in a block that would recreate a point light falloff perfectly in empty space with no aliasing or artifacts
AdrianM: And I suppose that whatever we end up using as a solution by definition has to be a kind of linear tranformation since it's discretized
Alexander: light is all additive, hence it's linear
Alexander: so any HRC implementation can only be linear in that sense
Alexander: the reason why we can't do occlusion with FFT is because the FFT basis is not based on lines, and we can only introduce occlusion into something that looks and acts like lines/intervals. as in, things that occlude each other in the order of their relative location. this is not the case with sin/cos basis, but is the case for anythign that resembles rays
Alexander: so we need an exact transform that transforms a set of NxN pixels into something that looks like NxN rays in a way that's exact. and that can be done very reliably (although slowly) with a direct inversion if you just define any set of NxN functions that vaguely resemble rays. or anything else really, as long as they're linearly independent
Alexander: i think there can't be any other way to think about this in a way that's exact
Alexander: anything else would be an approximation or rely on introducing assumptions of some sort
AdrianM: And the cascades in RC doing this way would be the implementation of the transform. Same as the logN in an FFT. Right?
Alexander: yes, it's a mathematical trick to cache computations that reoccur
AdrianM: Huh, it's nice to finally have connected those ideas. HRC and FFTs
Alexander: but yes it's a good way to think about it, it's like N^2 discrete cosine transform that's trivial to implement first
Alexander: and then replace it with an FFT
Alexander: but the answer won't change at all
AdrianM: So what's stopping us from using a radon transform (which uses an FFT under the hood)?
AdrianM: Radon transform, then we can change the coordinate system any way we want if we'd like to see it in straight line space
Alexander: is that exact? does it actually reproduce a single standalone pixel if you apply it and then the inverse?
Alexander: I can see a potential N log^2 N solution using fft
Alexander: but i think we can make it faster
AdrianM: They use it for reconstructing medical images and those are sharp
AdrianM: I assume there's some way they've got it solved
Alexander: i think we're at the point where we know enough to reinvent the same algorithm first and then to make a better one
Alexander: for example, i want to be able to support antialiased line basis which they don't support
Alexander: this will help us later produce smoother shadows once we start occluding individual rays
Alexander: but yes, curiously it should have literally 0 effect on point light falloff in empty space. it doesn't matter how we rasterize lines or which line basis we use, it should look exactly the way we want it to
AdrianM: What do you mean?
AdrianM: Above weren't you talking about being able to match any arbitrary falloff?
Alexander: but radon transform is defined for one very specific way of rasterizing lines
Alexander: which i'd argue is an unnecessary restriction on what we can do
Alexander: and we can achieve any falloff exactly with any algorithm of line rasterization
AdrianM: That's weird, I wonder why they'd use a restriction like that? The real world data they're processing shouldn't be any different from simulating rays of light.
Alexander: because that way of rasterizing lines leads to an easy way to implement an FFT-like algorithm to transform them fast
AdrianM: Hold on, if I'm following then if you solve this problem then you also get a better algorithm for medical imaging.
Alexander: i think we should actually implement the FFT way, just so that we'd stop thinking about merging as a process of connecting rays, because that's entirely irrelevant
Alexander: the problem that i want to solve is doing it with precise accuracy for lines that are rasterized in an arbitrary ways. it does not mean that for any way of rasterizing lines there is going to be a solution that's fast enough for practical purposes. but i want to show first that we can do it
Alexander: and then find a way to rasterize lines that looks good and one that we can solve for fast
AdrianM: Sounds almost like we want a way to do completely arbitrary discrete transforms
Alexander: we can, just slowly
Alexander: and maybe there is no way to do an arbitrary transform liek that in O(N log N)
Alexander: but that's not the point. i just want to show that we can do it accurately first
AdrianM: N log N or N^2 log N?
Alexander: because we've been looking for a long time at algorithms that work in the same amount of time but produce different results in terms of accuracy. i want to try the other way round, get an accurate result first using the same data, and then reformulate that in our way to make it faster
Alexander: i'm talking 1D
Alexander: but yes in 2D it's N^2 log N or N^2 log^2 N if we actually want it fft-based
Alexander: because it's going to be N^2 log N per cascade, log N cascades
AdrianM: Oh, that's rough. But I suppose as long as the memory scales the same as regular HRC then there's hope
AdrianM: Actually I am more curious about the memory than the computation
Alexander: the amount of memory is exactly the same
Alexander: well anyway the solution will look and scale exactly like hrc
Alexander: the final solution would have the form of HRC but with specific ways of doing extensions paired with merging or of HRC but with a very specific ways of rasterizing lines
Alexander: but we'll cross that bridge when we get there
AdrianM: I'm curious how the transforms between cascades will look like.
JoshJers: (looking in and understanding very little of what's going on here) same, since that's where all the pain is 😄
Alexander: i think we have totally cornered us by thinking too much about cascades
Alexander: cascades are an acceleration structure that only exists to reduce the amount of computation
Alexander: they should have no effect on what we're trying to calculate
Alexander: i think we have spent way too much time trying to invent a merging scheme that results in a nice falloff, when in reality we should have achieved a nice falloff within one cascade first and then added cascades on top of it in a way that does not affect it
JoshJers: don't we already effectively have a "nice falloff within one cascade", though? isn't that what "just trace the whole scene per pixel" is?
Alexander: that produces aliasing
Alexander: you should try that for a single pixel light and see what the result it
JoshJers: no, I get it, you have to crank infinity rays to get it right 😄
JoshJers: my GPU doesn't yet do infinite rays
AdrianM: Did you try overclocking it?
Alexander: just wait for the next generation
Alexander: sure that'll do it
Alexander: hmm... interesting
Alexander: so imagine we have the simplest possible case, a 2x2 block with 4 pixels and 4 lines. we want to represent the red pixel exactly, while using the 4 green basis lines that I called a, b, c and d. this leads to a system that all pixels are supposed to be black except the top right one:

a + c = 1
a + d = 0
c + b = 0
b + d = 0
v
a + c = 1
a + d = 0
c - d = 0
v
a + c = 1
a + c = 0

this has no solution
Alexander: this means that this arrangement of lines that we use is non invertible
Alexander: interesting, i wonder if there are easy ways to find a way to rasterize lines that is invertible
Alexander: interesting, anti-aliased lines is also non invertible
fad: i feel like it's something to do with that pattern only having lines connecting left side to right side
fad: that's only a subset of the directions so i think it makes sense it can't reproduce arbitrary fluence fields
Alexander: but it's 4 lines
Alexander: i'm trying different arrangements
fad: they aren't linearly independnt though, c+d-a=b
fad: by + and - i mean superimposing the images you have on the right
fad: not the radiance of the lines
Alexander: oh interesting these are linearly independent
Alexander: yeah you're right
Alexander: so interestingly for this line pattern there is actually an O(N) solution where we can deduce them one after another
Alexander: very interseting
Alexander: this is the "upper 45 degrees cone basis" i should probably clarify
fad: ~~this also linearly independent:~~
a:```[#][#]
[ ][ ]```b:```[ ][ ]
[#][#]```c:```[#][ ]
[#][ ]```d:```[ ][#]
[ ][#]
```
tomatopaste: c is just -b
Alexander: but a+b = c+d?
fad: you're right, nvm
Alexander: no, they're are 0/1 not -1/1
tomatopaste: ~b then?
Alexander: does this mean that the only way to make HRC exact is to do it in the upper 45 degree triangle at a time?
Alexander: not one quadrant at a time?
Alexander: should test larger patterns like 4x4
tomatopaste: b = 1 - c
fad: yeah i think 2x2 is too small to make any conclusions
Alexander: but all nice/symmetric patterns are totally fucked
Alexander: especially all patterns that just produce a uniform fill for every direction
Alexander: like line sweeping type patterns are all fucked
Alexander: because whenever you sweep for one direction you fill the whole area, which is the same as filling it in some other sweep direction
fad: i have a hunch that it's okay to have more lines than pixels, and in that case line sweep patterns are back on the table. but i don't have any proof of that
Alexander: yes it should be ok to have more, but then the other way is going to be non invertible
fad: like, discrete radon transform is able to make more lines than pixels work and they just have a pseudoinverse instead of a real inverse
Alexander: it can probably work with more sweep directions than necessary
Alexander: but if we restrict to only lnes in certain directions maybe it can be made unique?
Alexander: ok going through the 4x4 pain
fad: are you restricting yourself to lines for the weight matrices? because otherwise obviously it's trivial to find invertible weight matrices (e.g. just have each correspond to a pixel basis function)
Alexander: fuck me that's hard
Alexander: 16 unknowns
Alexander: ofc it specifically needs to be lines in order to add occlusion later
Alexander: the better the lines, the better shadows we'll get later
fad: i feel like for good shadows you'll definitely end up needing more lines than pixels
Alexander: i feel like good shadows should be obtainable with anti-aliased lines
Alexander: note that if it's the same number of lines as pixels but for one 45 degree sector, it's total 8x more lines than pixels, all directions concerned
Alexander: how peculiar
fad: what do you mean "one 45 degree sector"?
like only including lines travelling in a 45 degree sector?
Alexander: so if we use left-right encoding scheme then lines that connect points (p, p + q) where p, q = 0..N
Alexander: or lines that start at every y-intercept point and then have any slope 0, 1/N-1, 2/N-1, ... N-1/N-1
Alexander: i don't think this is invertible for 4x4
fad: i mean it kind of make sense, how would lines only going from left to right recreate a fluence field that was a vertical line?
Alexander: it would reproduce it in a way that's not travelling vertically
Alexander: like a bunch of crosses that all intersect on that line and then a bunch of negative fluence rays to remove the rest
Alexander: are you implying we should be looking for full coverage bases?
fad: ok well if it did recreate a vertical line (and every other line crossing the image) then that's kind of sus isn't it?
Alexander: you think it shouldn't be able to?
Alexander: i think it should, as long as there are negative rays to represent a nonphysical situation
Alexander: only physical fluence configurations should have all rays nonnegative
fad: it feels weird to use a bunch of horizontal lines to recreate a light ray going vertically, and if that is possible then i feel that trying to add shadows to those basis lines would be crazy
fad: but like, these are just intuitions, would be awesome to see it working
Alexander: the reason why it's not crazy is because at every stage of the algorithm we have only rays that are travelling in a 45 degrees as cN+1 source and we merge only those rays onto cN, so it should always be representable
Alexander: anyway i think the 45 degree thing is a red herring
Alexander: i don't think  4x4 is invertible
Alexander: there has to be a better way
Alexander: maybe not involving 45 degrees
Alexander: how do we construct a line basis that looks like lines and is still fully invertible?
Alexander: oh hmm... maybe we also do that recursively?
Alexander: imagine we start with a basis where each "line" corresponds to 1 pixel
Alexander: and then we start combining them at every step
Alexander: in some way that avoids linearly dependent combinations
Alexander: because as you said, it's trivial to find a basis that's linearly independent. it's only hard to find one that also looks like lines at the same time
fad: is it true that, as long as you're allowed to have negative lines, you can recreate any image?
fad: maybe even with negative lines it still doesn't let you recreate any image
Alexander: i think you should be able to. if it doesn't allow you to, it means it's not invertible and i think it should be invertible
fad: i don't see a reason why you should be able to (and i also don't see a reason why you shouldn't be able to)
Alexander: the reason why you should be able to is that clearly bases can be linearly independent and for NxN linearly independent basis functions it should be invertible
Alexander: so you're arguing maybe lines shouldn't be linearly independent
fad: yes, i think there's a chance that it's not possible to create NxN linearly independent lines
fad: now, i don't think that's necessarily a problem, because physical fluence fields are not arbitrary
Alexander: then what's the minimal number that allows to create a fully invertible basis that looks like lines?
Alexander: would it be 4xNxN? 16xNxN? NxNxN?
fad: if it's not possible to create NxN linearly independent lines then it's not possible to create M>NxN linearly independent lines either
fad: i'm saying i think there's a chance that the total number of linearly independent lines that exist is <NxN
Alexander: ok i mean how many lines do you need at mininum in order to represent any (including non-physical) fluence field?
fad: what is a "non-physical" fluence field? just an arbitrary image? because i think it might be impossible to recreate an arbitrary image by just adding/subtracting lines
Alexander: arbitrary image yes
Alexander: [image]
Alexander: Pinned a message.
fad: i was literally about to send string art before you sent that :KEKW:
fad: string art does not recreate the original input image, and that only includes positive weights
Alexander: i'm sure with negative weights it can do anything
fad: i'm not convinced
Alexander: i think this sounds like a shadertoy project
Alexander: keep splattering lines until it converges to an arbitrary image
fad: might as well just try reproducing an arbitrary pixel instead
fad: which is probably equally as hard, granted you don't pick an "easy" pixel like one of the 4 corner pixels
Alexander: i think i know how to do it
Alexander: well i already did just with non-random lines
fad: and if you know how to reproduce an arbitrary pixel then you can recreate any arbitrary image
fad: ok, say i have NxN image. what lines do i add up to recreate pixel (i,j) ?
Alexander: all of them
Alexander: but i can tell you what brightness to use for each one
Alexander: that brightness is the current residual integrated over that line
Alexander: where residual is pixel color that you want minus the current color of that pixel that you have accumulated from all the previous lines
Alexander: there are much more efficient ways, this is very slow, but it should converge
fad: how do you know that actually converges?
Alexander: because i tried it
fad: where?
Alexander: these
fad: btw these are interesting videos on string art (each only around 10mins long)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WGccIFf6MF8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dBlSmg5T13M

second video uses radon transform
Alexander: Pinned a message.
fad: string art is like the circle perimeter indexing scheme
Alexander: rings strike back yes
fad: i'm not convinced this is converging
fad: espcially this one, what is all the extra stuff at the top/bottom?
Alexander: that's not a circular basis
fad: for a single pixel, if it's possible then i think it should have an easy answer that you could give me, that's not some iterative procedure with no proof it actually converges besides "trust me bro"
Alexander: > https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WGccIFf6MF8
this describes exactly what i was describing with inversion
Alexander: ahhh... they do minimal least squares, looks like
fad: yes, even they hypothesize the matrix isn't invertible lol
Alexander: or pseudoinverse
fad: but they don't give any proof that's its uninvertible
Alexander: they just assume it's probably not
fad: and also it wouldn't be useful for string art anyway since string art doesn't allow negative weights
Alexander: interesting that they solve for binary lines
Alexander: as in, lines either exist or not
Alexander: okay pseudoinverse then
Alexander: how
fad: in that first video, the algorithm they use at the end doesn't actually do anything with matrices or minimal least squares. it's just some intuitive algorithm they came up with
Alexander: it is very similar to what i said with random lines
Alexander: just calculate error for every line you splat
Alexander: and splat with that error times -1
Alexander: it will converge
Alexander: trust
fad: anyway, i had an idea. i am going to put a bunch of lines bases that cover an NxN image into a matrix and then ask numpy to compute the rank of the matrix
Alexander: maybe it's like N/2 or someting
fad: if the rank is NxN then i am proven wrong, if the rank is less than NxN then line bases aren't capable of recreating arbitrary images
Alexander: i hope you'll get some near constant rank decrease
Alexander: like NxN/4 or something of that sort
Alexander: which means we need 4x more lines than pixels to invert an arbitrary image or something of that sort
Alexander: you can also keep adding more lines until you reach rank NxN
fad: that's what i meant, i am going to put way more than NxN lines into the matrix to give it the best chance of finding a set of NxN linearly independent lines
Alexander: so you're doubting that it will ever reach rank NxN?
Alexander: obviously it can't get higher than NxN regardless of how many lines you give it
Alexander: but you think you can't even get to NxN?
fad: well that's my hypothesis
fad: i don't have proof either way though
fad: so i will try this numpy experiment
Alexander: i think that's still perfectly fine if it turns out you can get something like NxN/2 or some round number
Alexander: inb4 NxN/e or NxN/pi
Alexander: nah it'll be NxN
fad: believers vs doubters
fad: who will win
Alexander: oh yeah i think i can show you why you can do any pixel
Alexander: basically what you'll try is using actually arbitrary lines. including any lines at irrational positions and going at irrational slopes, rasterized with dda
Alexander: i think you can probably represent any pixel as a sum of two very similar lines that only differ by that pixel
fad: ok, that's true
Alexander: it's just really stupid
Alexander: but possible
fad: i think it's more interesting if you restrict yourself to antialiased lines which will stop you from relying on aliasing tricks
Goobley: I dropped off the face of the world for a few days, so the latest development is recasting the whole thing as a mega system of equations for the ground truth solution?
Alexander: that's the current direction that lured fad back
fad: yes we want to find reference solutions via dumb brute force ways so that we know what we're aiming for
Alexander: i just want to know the rank of the common line bases that we use
Goobley: That makes complete sense, and for the occlusion free case, should be quite easily set up?
Alexander: we have set it up, and currently struggling with the realization that all line bases that we use are linearly dependent
Alexander: to what degree we don't know
Goobley: Oh, so the system is underspecified?
RadianceCausality: I'd bet it's around 2x
RadianceCausality: Maybe a bit less
Alexander: we need more lines than what we use to make it have rank NxN
Alexander: or we need to find an interesting way to rasterize NxN lines that results in rank NxN
Alexander: which i also think must be possible
Goobley: SVD should give the minimum norm solution for an underspecified system
Goobley: Is that useful?
Alexander: we want to also play with pseudoinversion and such
Alexander: but SVD is ultra pain on the GPU for systems as large as we have
Alexander: so we'll probably need to resort to some numpy shenanigans or C++ bicycle reinvention
Alexander: or rust if RC gets interested
Alexander: but he's a line hater
RadianceCausality: Actually isn't there literally that radon transformation inverse paper
Alexander: they pseudoinverse
RadianceCausality: Aw ok
Alexander: because they just use some random way to rasterize and enumerate lines
Alexander: without any concern for the rank of what they're building
Goobley: Ahhh, I hadn't actually looked into how parallel SVD does(n't) work, since in my stuff we use it per thread on small matrices
Alexander: large SVD bad
Alexander: @fad i think you can generate NxN random lines, get the rank and then keep wiggling lines one by one randomly and save it if it increases the rank
Alexander: i reckon you might be able to produce a rank NxN basis that way
Goobley: <https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.11467v1> these people improve a bit over cuSolver, but it's still not something you'd want to do
Goobley: To solve the underspecified system does this end up being a quadratic programming problem?
Alexander: i think it can be done with minimal least squares
Goobley: Yeah, different constraints lead to different ways of setting that up
Goobley: Like, if we can get it cast as a symmetric positive definite matrix the Cholesky should mostly "fix" it
fad: currently pulling my hair out because python throws a `ZeroDivisionError` if you try doing floating-point division by zero
fad: bruh just give me infinity and let me move on
Goobley: Use `np.float64`
Goobley: Numpy will warn, but it will do it at least
ion: wouldnt that result in a pair of pixels? a positive and negative one.
ion: I'm probably completely misunsderstanding this. But shouldnt c+b be 0.5 instead of 0?
fad: ok well i'm proven wrong :KEKW:
fad: here is an example invertible line basis for 8x8 image
Alexander: what is it
Alexander: sorry i mean what's the formula for the lines
fad: even with antialiasing, i think intuitively it uses this idea
fad: i just generated way more lines than necessary (2500 lines) and asked numpy to find a linearly independent set amongst those
Alexander: smart
Alexander: what is special about that set
fad: honestly i don't think there's anything remarkable about it
Alexander: did you generate them arbitrarily before filtering or by some pattern?
Alexander: i think what this means is that the bases that we usually use are almost invertible?
Alexander: hmm.. i see
Alexander: you have a lot of those lines that differ by one pixel
Alexander: which is really too boring for practical means
Alexander: how do we generate a better one
Alexander: rank NxN
fad: basically just uniform sweeps in 50 different directions
Alexander: maybe
Alexander: how come it picked up ones that are almost horizontal?
Alexander: first ones it checked?
Alexander: did you write this or an llm
fad: this is the snippet i got from chatgpt
```py
independent_vectors = []

for v in vectors:
    candidate_set = np.array(independent_vectors + [v])
    if np.linalg.matrix_rank(candidate_set) > len(independent_vectors):
        independent_vectors.append(v)
```
i wrote everything else
fad: well i also asked it how to save an image in python
fad: but yeah
fad: the fact it managed to find 64 independent lines within the first few kind of shows how boring it is
Alexander: how long does it take it to find the answer?
Alexander: how large of an image can you do an analytical inversion for?
Alexander: can we adjust our rasterization algorithm slightly so that the bases that we usually use become linearly independent?
fad: for this 8x8 thing it's like <50ms
Alexander: what would be the criterion to find a basis that results in "the most positive coefficients for real fluence images"?
fad: 16x16, 2500 candidate lines
~500ms
Alexander: how about you generate fewer lines initially so that they're more different?
Alexander: also maybe try more restrictive bases? like only left right lines etc
fad: 20 sweep directions (within each sweep direction it generates 50 lines with varying position). it actually failed to find 256th line
fad: but i think this numpy thing is pretty numerically unstable. if i change the order the lines are fed (direction major instead of position major) then it only finds 193 lines. kinda sus
Alexander: reliable and trustworthy
fad: ok i set the magical `tol`erance optional parameter for the matrix rank function to `1e-20` and it found all of them again
Alexander: if you set it to use non antialiased lines, does it still rely on tolerance?
fad: left right basis with 30x30=900 candidate lines (30 steps along left/right sides)
fad: i see what it's doing :KEKW:
fad: btw my antialiasing strategy here is just coloring each pixel based on the length of line that passes through it. that's why those images look "aliased"
fad: the lines would've just passed through liek this
Alexander: do you want to try actually inverting some matrices?
Alexander: and convert a bunch of arbitrary images into lines
Alexander: then, try disabling random lines in it to see how it's constructed
Alexander: also try actual point sources
Alexander: imagine if a point source inverts into something that's not lines intersecting at its center :KEKW:
fad: kinda almost certain that will be the case
Alexander: kinda wanna see that
fad: i'm having trouble inverting the matrix found by the matrix rank code because numpy is complaining it's singular :KEKW:
fad: reliable and trustworthy
Alexander: maybe dont use antialiasing?
Alexander: should be more binary then
RadianceCausality: Use least squares?
Alexander: try with aa off
fad: yes aa off worked
fad: images in order:
1. target image (which gets reconstructed exactly since the basis is invertible)
2. line basis
3. weights (red = positive, green = negative) (a lot are clipping because they are greater than 1)
4. weights remapped by dividing by `max(abs(weights)) = 36.6`
fad: this is left right line basis
RadianceCausality: Can you do one pixel instead
fad: https://discord.com/channels/1277053173764460625/1472580758706065501/1476184907859365908
RadianceCausality: ?
fad: it even does that for this point light. like it uses these two lines with one being positive weight and the other being negative weight. but the only difference between them is these 4 pixels. so it exploits that and basically ends up using these two lines to selectively color only those 4 pixels
RadianceCausality: That's kinda weird
fad: it's boring
fad: and is a consequence of allowing negative weights
fad: i don't think there's much insight to be had here from all this tbh
fad: @Alexander
fad: this is what we need to do next
fad: positive coefficients makes more sense because the lights in our scene are only positive
fad: if you allow negative coefficients then you start exploiting random aliasing pixel differences which i don't think is very insightful
AdrianM: If we don't want to think about negative rays then we can add some default brightness to the scene
AdrianM: For example a point light rendered over a .5 grey background
AdrianM: In that case the default scene would have all rays lit up at a value of .5 then adding things to the scene some of the rays would decrease their brightness (down to a limit of 0) but still be positive
AdrianM: Hmmm, a single point represented with a series of lines will have a falloff
AdrianM: So to remove that falloff we can add negative light points around it which themselves have a falloff
AdrianM: And we want it to cancel out the falloff without canceling out the point itself
AdrianM: And if we can do that for a single pixel then by definition we can do it for all pixels and add it all together
AdrianM: Doesn't that mean we can use a single pixel with falloff as our basic function since we already know that can be represented with lines?
AdrianM: Sounds simple enough
Alexander: i was sleeping
Alexander: hmm.. what does this mean.. maybe we can show that if we use a better basis (for example, diagonal encoding, all directions included) we can show that there are fewer negative coefficients, and then find a limit for which point lights can be represented with no negative coefficients at all?
Alexander: most of these lines intersect at the point light position
Alexander: maybe we can see what various subsets of that look like? for example, what do just positive rays add up to? what do randomly selected half of those lines add up to?
Alexander: i was thinking what this means. so currently we essentially gave it a point source and asked it "which lines represent it?". but as a matter of fact, the problem that we have in practice is the opposite: we actually know which lines _should_ represent any given pixel. in left-right encoding we can define a range on the left and a range on the right, and all rays in that "ribbon" are known to intersect exactly at the target point.
Alexander: here bundles (p1, p2) and bundles (q1, q2) are known to intersect at point x, so we actually know that they should add up to its falloff exactly. what we don't know is how exactly we can rasterize rays in that range and even which rays technically count as belonging to that range, because some rays might not necessarily go through x
Alexander: in fact, we don't even know how many rays intersect or should intersect at x
Alexander: but i think we can actually define what rays _should be_ just by answering these simple question. for example, how many rays should intersect at x? i think the answer should always be exactly N rays, for any point x
Alexander: so for a given point x we can enumerate exactly N rays and say that all of them have x in their rasterization pattern
Alexander: this means we can define every point of every ray just because we know every point that that ray should pass through
Alexander: note that this is distinct from defining rays individually. this condition where we're saying that exactly N rays should go through every point, means that we know these N rays should contain that point, but it also means that the same ray direction might be rasterized differently depending on its origin
Alexander: or might result in some pattern of even/odd rays rasterization
Alexander: we've never tried anything like this, i wonder what it would look like if we simply define rays by this quality
Alexander: here i'm showing some vertical column of pixels. every pixel should actually not share any rays with any other pixel on that column. so we need to subdivide the set of all our NxN rays and assign exactly N rays to each pixel there
Alexander: and that pixel must be in the rasterization pattern of every line that we assign to it
Alexander: note that this property hold "automatically" for rays that are at good fractional points like 1/2 and 1/4 just because of how integer division works, but this is also the same exact region where we usually have zero error
Alexander: the instruments that we need to solve this involve an operation like "pick K uniformly sampled points in an integer range [A..B]", which is a problem we never needed to solve before but that feels like something we should be addressing in one way or another
Alexander: how did we get this far without ever doing it?
Goobley: I feel like the complexity in the way you’re describing this is it has to be done for all pixels in the domain simultaneously, right? Because getting the falloff correct for a pixel is the same as computing the fluence in a pixel within that falloff pattern
Alexander: i'm proposing doing it one column at a time. so doing it this way won't guarantee any falloff properties at all, but I wonder what kind of falloff it would result in
Goobley: Ohhh right yeah, the rays are independent but the pixels are shared in that case
Alexander: i have a feeling that constructing a basis this way might not result in a perfect falloff, but it should have some visual properties that we have never seen before
Alexander: i can't quite predict what they are
Goobley: I was just speaking to a colleague who’s tried a lot of things over the years and he was saying that for volume reconstruction (e.g. ct scans) with strongly varying opacity that the radon transform has never worked well but the core methods there are all Fourier based, but how you combine all the Fourier samples is super important
Goobley: I feel like it should be smooth at least
Goobley: …surely someone in medical imaging has worked on “how many samples in angle do we need to get a reasonable image” unless the default is to massively oversample or something
Alexander: man, this is a combinatorical problem. i actually am not sure how to solve it. so we have a column of N pixels and we have total NxN rays. we need to split those NxN rays into N groups (one group associated with each pixel) such that every group contains exactly N rays that pass through that pixel
Alexander: none of the bases that we've ever used satisfied this property
Goobley: That’s kinda nuts, and in my head doesn’t immediately feel possible, but I also can’t sketch a counter example
Alexander: it's definitely possible, it might just not exactly result in lines that look straight
Alexander: or it might not result in a good falloff
Alexander: but i mean obviously one solution is to just split NxN lines into groups [0..N-1][N-1...2N-1]... they just won't form lines at all, but this property would be satisfied
Alexander: so we need to finesse them into groups that also resemble lines in space
Alexander: it's entirely a combinatorical issue
Goobley: If you start from each pixel on the line and trace lines outwards you might then be able to “snap” them to the NxN set without needing to do the whole combinatorial problem (at the cost of an expensive O(N) to trace against one side and do the snapping)
Alexander: it's like snap direction needs to be chosen for every line such that exactly N lines intersect every pixel
Goobley: I guess it can just be brute forced at low resolution
Alexander: another interesting property that stems from this:
Alexander: point A has to have exactly N lines passing through it, point B also has to have exactly N lines passing through it, but none of those lines can be shared between them
Alexander: it's like each line can only belong to one pixel in that column
Goobley: It’s also interesting how the line density is higher on the left boundary. It’s obvious that it has to be, but yes, that leads you to independent sets for every pixel in the NxN area (with few repeated rays, intuitively)
Alexander: maybe it's easier to think about 45 degree cones:
Alexander: here
Alexander: here D = a + b. just setting b and then y-position uniquely defines the location of point A and all lines that pass trhough in that 45-degree double cone
Alexander: but how do we even enumerate exactly N rays in that cone?
Alexander: so we need to enumerate N rays in the range [0..b]x[0..a] where a+b = N
Goobley: The simplest way would be evenly split angles, imo, but I don’t think it would work well
Alexander: yes but it's all discretized
Alexander: you can't even split angles because they'd often round and end up counting the same line multiple times that way
Alexander: pixels are discrete on the left and on the right lines
Goobley: Indeed, but if they’re fully discrete and b gets small enough, can you even get N valid lines?
Alexander: so if b=0 then it's just these rays : [0, 0], [0, 1], ....[0, N-1]
Alexander: if b = N, then it's these rays: [N-1, 0], [N-1, 1], [N-1, 2]...[N-1, N-1]
Alexander: it's also easy to define for stuff like b = N/2
Goobley: Oh right yeah of course
Alexander: but how do we do that for an arbitrary pair of a, b where a+b = N?
Goobley: The issue comes for random b. I don’t see an obvious recurrence relation to get the rays at b=n+1 from b=n
Alexander: i think they should not depend on each other at all
Alexander: we can solve them completely independently, maybe?
Alexander: because rays can be shared for different values of a, b
Goobley: The rays themselves are definitely independent
Alexander: they only can't be shared for the same vales of a, b translated vertically
Alexander: here A and B can't share any rays, but C can share rays with both A and B
Goobley: Enumerating over all the pairs of end points in the cone is still O(N^2) worst case too
Alexander: it's fine to find it slowly because we need to do it once
Alexander: to figure out how to rasterize every lien
Alexander: once we know which pixels belong to each line we can remember that knowledge and not re-calculate it every time
Goobley: Yeah. So it can be calculated for all possible pairs of start/end points give an a,b pair then
Goobley: And like you said is vertically translationally invariant
Alexander: i wonder if it can be translationally invariant, in fact
Alexander: because maybe it can't
fad: :thonk: a majority of the lines don’t pass through the point light position
Alexander: and then the set of lines defined for every a,b would also detect on y
Alexander: that's why i think we should try the other way round. we know which lines should intersect at any given point. but we don't know what those lines should exactly look like
Alexander: so we can calculate what each line has to look like, in order to add up to every point light at every position
Alexander: @fad can you help us figure this out?
Alexander: how do we subdivide lines that way?
Goobley: If we have a=b=N/2 then we have N^2/4 lines available, and somehow have to pick N of those? Or… maybe any N of those is sufficient
Alexander: for any a, b there are always N lines
Alexander: why do you think it's N^2/4?
Goobley: Just enumerating end point pairs
Alexander: so i think we need to be thinking about this in a more global scale. the planes are infinite they have infinitely many points
Goobley: So, a non discretised model?
Alexander: yes you're right we need to be choosing N out of N^2/4
Goobley: I think my brain has clocked off for the night. I will sleep on it
Alexander: hmm... i think i need to try some really inefficient things just to get some answer
Alexander: and see if it's worth trying to find it faster
Alexander: @fad do you see where it's coming from?
fad: so the goal is to find NxN lines paired with some rasterization method, such that for every column of pixels, each pixel has N of those lines passing through it, and none of the pixels in the column share any lines?
Alexander: yes exactly
Alexander: the thing is, this procedure _defines_ a way of rasterizing lines
Alexander: because you enumerate which lines pass through each pixel
Alexander: which also defines which pixels belong to each line
fad: are the NxN lines chosen from a left/right encoding scheme?
Alexander: i think it has to be y-intersept + rational slope
Alexander: so slope is an integer, i think they also call it raise
Alexander: yea i think it should be called y-intercept + raise
Alexander: this is the classic HRC scheme
fad: have you made any progress
Alexander: i have not started yet
Alexander: man i just realized it's a thing like 15 minutes ago
Alexander: struggling to even define it for now
Alexander: because this will define it for discretely rasterized lines. but what does it mean for antialiased lines? that woul be the next step
Alexander: also, what kind of falloff would lines defined this way produce?
Alexander: i think even this scheme would allow multiple ways to define lines that satisfy it. i'm hoping that among them there can be one that produces the right falloff
Alexander: but this property would almost certainly have to hold if an arragnement of lines that always produces the right falloff exists at all
fad: once again we found ourselves using NxN lines for only a subset of directions
Alexander: yes it would be a 45/90 degree thing
Alexander: so a vertical line defined this way would not correspond to a vertical ray, it would correspond to a vertical line of emissive points
Alexander: what this could give us is a way of producing line rasterization rules that can work. but then among all such rules we might have to do some filtering afterwards to find ones that satisfy other properties that we care about
fad: feels arbitrary. why do we need NxN lines per 45/90 degrees? why not NxN per 120 degrees or some other arbitrary number?
Alexander: i don't understand enough about this to tell if it's obligatory or not
Alexander: for some reason i think there is something special about this 45 degree arrangement, but maybe it's an illusion
Alexander: if you're right and N lines spanning 120 degrees can also be made to satisfy this property then they clearly can't have anything that resembles a good falloff
Alexander: because there will be gaps
Alexander: alright i implemented the thing
Alexander: [image]
Alexander: [image]
Alexander: it definitely produces some pretty nice falloffs
RadianceCausality: Mmmmmmmoire
Alexander: https://www.shadertoy.com/view/W3yfDK
Alexander: there is still too much freedom here
Alexander: rounding is all arbitrary and can be defined in infinitely many ways
Alexander: there has to be a way to further constrain it
Goobley: There's definitely potential there
Alexander: i think maybe we need to implement the fft radon transform thing
Alexander: just to have a reference
Alexander: would fft radon transform produce a perfect falloff, i wonder?
Goobley: I think the discretiation artifacts might prevent that
Goobley: Tried a popular python library for CT stuff. Whatever interpolation they use in the tracing stage to get the sinogram messes with the reconstruction of the point source
Alexander: produces a point source from a point
Alexander: i mean that's kind of what we want in the empty space
Alexander: can you inspect in greater detail its falloff? especially if you move the source
Alexander: is that a 1/r falloff?
Alexander: can you view that falloff greatly multiplied on a black background without a palette applied?
Goobley: yep, will do. I just wanted to look at the case where the angular samples taken = N
Goobley: Lots of rays in the reconstruction
Alexander: it's really hard to see on a non-black background what's going on
Alexander: the background is much brighter than the data
Alexander: also might need an srgb conversion
Goobley: With srgb conversion
Alexander: riiight
Alexander: can you play with parameters? what if there are more lines?
Goobley: Yep. So the free parameters are the number of detector pixels (parallel rays), and the number of angles
Alexander: what if you crank those up?
Goobley: Oki doki. Let me make a script because doing this whole thing in the terminal was a mistake :KEKW:
Alexander: their lines have a very interesting antialiasing pattern
Alexander: there's a chance they overlap into something nice
Goobley: This is the classic backprojection algorithm
Goobley: There are more advanced ones too
Alexander: yeah we should explore and see if there is any algorithm that has lines that add up to a nice falloff
Alexander: ideally there should be no parameters, other than the image size
Goobley: Mega oversampling (1024 rays per line, 1024 line angles)
Alexander: well.. hmm there should be no parameter to oversample
Alexander: that looks good though, so maybe there's a way to achieve that somehow with fewer lines, but each line representing a bundle?
Alexander: not sure
Goobley: I'll play with the parameters some more. The falloff looks to be 1/r though
Goobley: All of the filtered reconstructions seem to explode into a mess of nans for a single point source (red=nan)
Goobley: So this is reconstructed from an NxN sinogram for a 45 degree cone
Goobley: Lots of Moiré again
Alexander: hmmm
Goobley: The associated sinogram is this. This is bringing back memories of a few weeks ago 😅
Alexander: linespace flashbacks
Goobley: Flicking through the code (which I will not invoke here directly as it's GPL), the projection in both directions is made using bilinear interpolation, and just takes steps of 1 in ray space
Goobley: Curious that that leads to falloff like this
Alexander: i don't know what's going on guys i have so many crazy ideas over the past week
Alexander: i think i just stumbled upon another one
Alexander: but it's really easier to implement than it is to explain
RadianceCausality: Is it still linespace?
fad: what is this? is it an implemetation of the every pixel in every column N distinct lines thing?
RadianceCausality: huh, even merging just Does Not Work if the emitter is >0 and the probe is <0
Alexander: https://discord.com/channels/318590007881236480/390264006402899979/1479514880238420022 people radon transforming
Alexander: @MartysMods | Pascal i guess they're here
Alexander: very cool that people are noticing radon transform now
MartysMods | Pascal: :hellothere:
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: \:)
AdrianM: I don't know if this even qualifies as HRC
AdrianM: This is just running the line extension algorithm on itself
AdrianM: Anyways, I'm going to hold off on ranting until I get something more promising. This is just an early proof of concept right now.
AdrianM: By any sane metric this shouldn't work. But it does, ray extensions take pixel data and create lines from it, and a line in linespace is a point. So if we just run the ray extensions shader on itself then it simulates lighting.
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Still artifacts, but different artifacts
Alexander: yeah that's a bit unusual
Alexander: i think even achieving the same result in a different way is useful, because it can be more general/more applicable to harder cases
Alexander: like 3d
AdrianM: I'm curious if there's a way to formulate this which doesn't lead to these pesky artifacts
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: So running the ray extensions algorithm (ignoring shadows) is equivalent to a realspace --> linespace converter
AdrianM: Which means if we run it twice we go realspace --> linespace --> realspace but with lighting
AdrianM: I am slightly simplifying
AdrianM: But the basic idea is sound
Alexander: technically, running it asccurately back and forth shouldn't change anything
Alexander: if it does, means you're doing something else
AdrianM: Which means that getting rid of artifacts is basically an issue of anti aliasing those lines???
AdrianM: A point becomes a line in linespace
AdrianM: A line becomes a point with falloff
AdrianM: So just running it back and forth adds falloff (which is the lighting we want)
Alexander: if the transformation is not reversible, means you're doing something else
Alexander: realspace point in darkness does not correspond to a line. realspace point light source with a 1/r falloff does.
AdrianM: Oh right, that was that negative ray value stuff you were thinking about / linear tranforms
AdrianM: Did you get that figured out?
AdrianM: What was the conclusion?
Alexander: that the actual transform should be invertible and have negatives, but it's also not what we need for lighting
AdrianM: Which channel was that in? (I don't have time right now, but eventually I may catch up on reading that)
Alexander: i think you can just reinvent that
Alexander: bu we've shown therea are actual invertible transforms with negatives
AdrianM: That makes sense
AdrianM: In any case, I'm interested in eliminating the artifacts, that's completely separate
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: So here's pretty close to the existing merge algorithm we have
AdrianM: You can see if I take the same logic and apply it to the ray extensions the line isn't sharp at all
AdrianM: But that blur seems to kind of smooth out the results
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: Meanwhile if I use a much more accurate ray extension algorithm then the merging it produces looks much worse
AdrianM: I want to be clear here, there is only one algorithm being used here. There is no separate extension and merging algorithm. In this implementation the same algorithm is being used for both.
AdrianM: Which I actually like conceptually, because it means we only have one problem to solve, but two ways of looking at it, sort of line a linespace dual
Alexander: do you have multiple cascades or one?
AdrianM: This is multiple cascades
Alexander: i think that having more than one cascade just complicates things. i haven't come to a conclusion how to have even one cascade represent a point light accurately
Alexander: like, how you construct a line basis that can represent a point light with the right falloff just inside of one cascade?
AdrianM: I thought the circles you were playing with were the solution to that question
Alexander: there is no satisfying line basis that i found that can represent a point light with an accurate falloff in a natural way
Alexander: without crazy negative weights and such
AdrianM: Come to think of it, if I can do a linespace transform (ignoring negatives) then there's no reason that should create artifacts.
AdrianM: I should be able to run that twice and have it apply falloff to a point
AdrianM: I don't have to use cascades to test that, it can be brute forced
AdrianM: I'm wondering if having a perfectly accurate anti aliased line is enough, or if it is the fact we have finite pixels which is messing it up?
AdrianM: If it turns out that we can solve it without artifacts using this approach with a brute force approach (but limited memory) then in theory it would just be a matter of replicating that exact line with a ray-extension type algorithm which can do it fast and apply shadows
Alexander: i was trying to see what would it even look like in the linespace to represent a realspace point source with the correct falloff
Alexander: and it really depends on how you define the lines. for most line definitions, there are lots of negatives, but some line spaces are better than others. so i'm sure there are some line spaces where indeed a point source with a perfect falloff is just a line in the linespace.
AdrianM: I haven't been thinking about falloff
AdrianM: Even if the falloff isn't circular but I can do it without artifacts then I count that as a win
Alexander: sure, "correct" falloff here might mean manhattan distance or whatever
Alexander: just without aliasing
AdrianM: Maybe tomorrow I'll try brute forcing it without any cascades and see what I can get
AdrianM: Hmmm actually I don't need to write any code to check that
AdrianM: Paint.net lets me draw antialiased lines
AdrianM: So in theory it would look something like this
Alexander: too much depends on how exactly you draw your antialiased lines
Alexander: it has to be a very deliberate process and who tf knows what paint.net does
AdrianM: Well but that sort of doesn't matter
AdrianM: The point is there exists some antialiased line drawing algorithm that produces this
AdrianM: Unfortunately we need it to be recursive in a way that supports shadows
AdrianM: Can I draw a perfectly smooth anti aliased line with a ray extensions algorithm? Hmmmmm
Alexander: i think the exact way to antialias lines needs to be constructed so that the result can represent point light falloff exactly
AdrianM: [image]
AdrianM: I'm starting to feel like the guy on the bottom
AdrianM: Feels like whatever I try is so close, but not right
Alexander: the grind continues
Alexander: so much stuff to try
redxaxder: the projective planes over finite fields have the point-count-to-line-count correspondence you were looking for, with linearly independent lines
redxaxder: the lines wrap around, though
Alexander: what does it look like
redxaxder: an example:
we need to pick a prime number. lets use 5. (this could be a power of a prime instead, but it will have a different feel to it)
a point is then a triple of integers mod 5, with the convention that nonzero scalar multiples of a point are the same.
to fix a correspondence with an ordinary (non-projective) plane we'll pick a dimension (say z). points that can be scaled to 1 in that dimension have a corresponding plane point. the others are called "points at infinity".

lines are given by equations (ax + by + cz = 0). each (a,b,c) (up to nonzero scalar multiple) gives a distinct line.
this may look like an equation for a plane, but since scalar multiples of a point are the same it collapses down.

I had an llm spit out tables of  points and lines:

finite points make a 5x5 grid:
(notation: [x:y:z] means (ax,ay,az) for nonzero a)
```
[0:0:1],[0:1:1],[0:2:1],[0:3:1],[0:4:1]
[1:0:1],[1:1:1],[1:2:1],[1:3:1],[1:4:1]
[2:0:1],[2:1:1],[2:2:1],[2:3:1],[2:4:1]
[3:0:1],[3:1:1],[3:2:1],[3:3:1],[3:4:1]
[4:0:1],[4:1:1],[4:2:1],[4:3:1],[4:4:1]
```
you get the corresponding non-projective ("affine") point by extracting x,y when z=1.

infinite points:
```
[1:0:0],[1:1:0],[1:2:0],[1:3:0],[1:4:0],[0:1:0]
```
redxaxder: lines:
redxaxder: the wraparound is the usual torroidal wraparound you get from mod 5
redxaxder: for porting it to the real setting, it probably makes sense to xy-swap some of the lines.
like `y = 3x+1` -> `2y = x + 2` -> `x = 2y + 3`
these are the same line only in the modular setting. (because 2*3 = 1 is true mod 5 but not usually)
Alexander: hmm.. i can't imagine in my head what those lines look like
Alexander: but the idea of using prime numbers in RC
Alexander: sounds interesting
redxaxder: here's a [desmos plot](https://www.desmos.com/calculator/02lqgeg8xz)
redxaxder: hmm now that i seen it drawn out it looks like there are more than two choices for making a continuous line out of the discrete line
redxaxder: ah there are variants for every scalar multiple (mod 5) of the line
redxaxder: ok, i guess there's probably no better way to pick variants than to try running a line from a lattice point to any other lattice point.
i updated the plot to do that
Alexander: it seems interesting
Alexander: but i don't understand what's going on
Alexander: is there some sort of an article that explains what's going on for idiots?
redxaxder: i can write an explanation that assumes less shared context in a bit
